01992L0043 — EN — 14.07.2025 — 007.001

This text is meant purely as a documentation tool and has no legal effect. The Union's institutions do not assume any liability for its contents. The authentic versions of the relevant acts, including their preambles, are those published in the Official Journal of the European Union and available in EUR-Lex. Those official texts are directly accessible through the links embedded in this document

COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 92/43/EEC

of 21 May 1992

on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora

(OJ L 206 22.7.1992, p. 7)

Amended by:

Official Journal

No

page

date

M1

COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 97/62/EC of 27 October 1997

L 305

42

8.11.1997

REGULATION (EC) No 1882/2003 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 29 September 2003

L 284

1

31.10.2003

COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 2006/105/EC of 20 November 2006

L 363

368

20.12.2006

COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 2013/17/EU of 13 May 2013

L 158

193

10.6.2013

DIRECTIVE (EU) 2025/1237 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 17 June 2025

L 1237

1

24.6.2025

Amended by:

A1

ACT
(94/C 241/08)

C 241

21

29.8.1994

L 001

1

..

A2

ACT
concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded

L 236

33

23.9.2003

Corrected by:

Corrigendum, OJ L 176, 20.7.1993, p.  29  (1992/43)

COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 92/43/EEC

of 21 May 1992

on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora

Definitions

Article 1

For the purpose of this Directive:

(a)

conservation means a series of measures required to maintain or restore the natural habitats and the populations of species of wild fauna and flora at a favourable status as defined in (e) and (i);

(b)

natural habitats means terrestrial or aquatic areas distinguished by geographic, abiotic and biotic features, whether entirely natural or semi-natural;

(c)

natural habitat types of Community interest means those which, within the territory referred to in Article 2:

(i)

are in danger of disappearance in their natural range;

or

(ii)

have a small natural range following their regression or by reason of their intrinsically restricted area;

or

(iii)

present outstanding examples of typical characteristics of one or more of the nine following biogeographical regions: Alpine, Atlantic, Black Sea, Boreal, Continental, Macaronesian, Mediterranean, Pannonian and Steppic.

Such habitat types are listed or may be listed in Annex I;

(d)

priority natural habitat types means natural habitat types in danger of disappearence, which are present on the territory referred to in Article 2 and for the conservation of which the Community has particular responsibility in view of the proportion of their natural range which falls within the territory referred to in Article 2; these priority natural habitat types are indicated by an asterisk (*) in Annex I;

(e)

conservation status of a natural habitat means the sum of the influences acting on a natural habitat and its typical species that may affect its long-term natural distribution, structure and functions as well as the long-term survival of its typical species within the territory referred to in Article 2.

The conservation status  of a natural habitat will be taken as ‘favourable’ when:

—

its natural range and areas it covers within that range are stable or increasing, and

—

the specific structure and functions which are necessary for its long-term maintenance exist and are likely to continue to exist for the foreseeable future, and

—

the conservation status of its typical species is favourable as defined in (i);

(f)

habitat of a species means an environment defined by specific abiotic and biotic factors, in which the species lives at any stage of its biological cycle;

(g)

species of Community interest means species which, within the territory referred to in Article 2, are:

(i)

endangered, except those species whose natural range is marginal in that territory and which are not endangered or vulnerable in the western palearctic region; or

(ii)

vulnerable, i.e. believed likely to move into the endangered category in the near future if the causal factors continue operating; or

(iii)

rare, i.e. with small populations that are not at present endangered or vulnerable, but are at risk. The species are located within restricted geographical areas or are thinly scattered over a more extensive range; or

(iv)

endemic and requiring particular attention by reason of the specific nature of their habitat and/or the potential impact of their exploitation on their habitat and/or the potential impact of their exploitation on their conservation status.

Such species are listed or may be listed in Annex II and/or Annex IV or V;

(h)

priority species means species referred to in (g) (i) for the conservation of which the Community has particular responsibility in view of the proportion of their natural range which falls within the territory referred to in Article 2; these priority species are indicated by an asterisk (*) in Annex II;

(i)

conservation status of a species means the sum of the influences acting on the species concerned that may affect the long-term distribution and abundance of its populations within the territory referred to in Article 2;

The conservation status will be taken as ‘favourable’ when:

—

population dynamics data on the species concerned indicate that it is maintaining itself on a long-term basis as a viable component of its natural habitats, and

—

the natural range of the species is neither being reduced nor is likely to be reduced for the foreseeable future, and

—

there is, and will probably continue to be, a sufficiently large habitat to maintain its populations on a long-term basis;

(j)

site means a geographically defined area whose extent is clearly delineated;

(k)

site of Community importance means a site which, in the biogeographical region or regions to which

it belongs,  contributes significantly to the maintenance or restoration at a favourable conservation status of a natural habitat type in Annex I or of a species in Annex II and may also contribute significantly to the coherence of Natura 2000 referred to in Article 3, and/or contributes significantly to the maintenance of biological diversity within the biogeographic region or regions concerned.

For animal species ranging over wide areas, sites of Community importance shall correspond to the places within the natural range of such species which present the physical or biological factors essential to their life and reproduction;

(l)

special area of conservation means a site of Community importance designated by the Member States through a statutory, administrative and/or contractual act where the necessary conservation measures are applied for the maintenance or restoration, at a favourable conservation status, of the natural habitats and/or the populations of the species for which the site is designated;

(m)

specimen means any animal or plant, whether alive or dead, of the species listed in Annex IV and Annex V, any part or derivative thereof, as well as any other goods which appear, from an accompanying document, the packaging or a mark or label, or from any other circumstances, to be parts or derivatives of animals or plants of those species;

(n)

the committee means the committee set up pursuant to Article 20.

Article 2

1.

The aim of this Directive shall be to contribute towards ensuring bio-diversity through the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora in the European territory of the Member States to which the Treaty applies.

2.

Measures taken pursuant to this Directive shall be designed to maintain or restore, at favourable conservation status, natural habitats and species of wild fauna and flora of Community interest.

3.

Measures taken pursuant to this Directive shall take account of economic, social and cultural requirements and regional and local characteristics.

Conservation of natural habitats and habitats of species

Article 3

1.

A coherent European ecological network of special areas of conservation shall be set up under the title Natura 2000. This network, composed of sites hosting the natural habitat types listed in Annex I and habitats of the species listed in Annex II, shall enable the natural habitat types and the species' habitats concerned to be maintained or, where appropriate, restored at a favourable conservation status in their natural range.

The Natura 2000 network shall include the special protection areas classified by the Member States pursuant to Directive 79/409/EEC.

2.

Each Member State shall contribute to the creation of Natura 2000 in proportion to the representation within its territory of the natural habitat types and the habitats of species referred to in paragraph 1. To that effect each Member State shall designate, in accordance with Article 4, sites as special areas of conservation taking account of the objectives set out in paragraph 1.

3.

Where they consider it necessary, Member States shall endeavour to improve the ecological coherence of Natura 2000 by maintaining, and where appropriate developing, features of the landscape which are of major importance for wild fauna and flora, as referred to in Article 10.

Article 4

1.

On the basis of the criteria set out in Annex III (Stage 1) and relevant scientific information, each Member State shall propose a list of sites indicating which natural habitat types in Annex I and which species in Annex II that are native to its territory the sites host. For animal species ranging over wide areas these sites shall correspond to the places within the natural range of such species which present the physical or biological factors essential to their life and reproduction. For aquatic species which range over wide areas, such sites will be proposed only where there is a clearly identifiable area representing the physical and biological factors essential to their life and reproduction. Where appropriate, Member States shall propose adaptation of the list in the light of the results of the surveillance referred to in Article 11.

The list shall be transmitted to the Commission, within three years of the notification of this Directive, together with information on each site. That information shall include a map of the site, its name, location, extent and the data resulting from application of the criteria specified in Annex III (Stage 1) provided in a format established by the Commission in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 21.

2.

On the basis of the criteria set out in Annex III (Stage 2) and in the framework both of each of the

nine  biogeographical regions referred to in Article 1 (c) (iii) and of the whole of the territory referred to in Article 2 (1), the Commission shall establish, in agreement with each Member State, a draft list of sites of Community importance drawn from the Member States' lists identifying

those which host one  or more priority natural habitat types or priority species.

Member States whose sites hosting one or more priority natural habitat types and priority species represent more than 5 % of their national territory may, in agreement with the Commission, request that the criteria listed in Annex III (Stage 2) be applied more flexibly in selecting all the sites of Community importance in their territory.

The list of sites selected as sites of Community importance, identifying those which host one or more priority natural habitat types or priority species, shall be adopted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 21.

3.

The list referred to in paragraph 2 shall be established within six years of the notification of this Directive.

4.

Once a site of Community importance has been adopted in accordance with the procedure laid down in paragraph 2, the Member State concerned shall designate that site as a special area of conservation as soon as possible and within six years at most, establishing priorities in the light of the importance of the sites for the maintenance or restoration, at a favourable conservation status, of a natural habitat type in Annex I or a species in Annex II and for the coherence of Natura 2000, and in the light of the threats of degradation or destruction to which those sites are exposed.

5.

As soon as a site is placed on the list referred to in the third subparagraph of paragraph 2 it shall be subject to Article 6 (2), (3) and (4).

Article 5

1.

In exceptional cases where the Commission finds that a national list as referred to in Article 4 (1) fails to mention a site hosting a priority natural habitat type or priority species which, on the basis of relevant and reliable scientific information, it considers to be essential for the maintenance of that priority natural habitat type or for the survival of that priority species, a bilateral consultation procedure shall be initiated between that Member State and the Commission for the purpose of comparing the scientific data used by each.

2.

If, on expiry of a consultation period not exceeding six months, the dispute remains unresolved, the Commission shall forward to the Council a proposal relating to the selection of the site as a site of Community importance.

3.

The Council, acting unanimously, shall take a decision within three months of the date of referral.

4.

During the consultation period and pending a Council decision, the site concerned shall be subject to Article 6 (2).

Article 6

1.

For special areas of conservation, Member States shall establish the necessary conservation measures involving, if need be, appropriate management plans specifically designed for the sites or integrated into other development plans, and appropriate statutory, administrative or contractual measures which correspond to the ecological requirements of the natural habitat types in Annex I and the species in Annex II present on the sites.

2.

Member States shall take appropriate steps to avoid, in the special areas of conservation, the deterioration of natural habitats and the habitats of species as well as disturbance of the species for which the areas have been designated, in so far as such disturbance could be significant in relation to the objectives of this Directive.

3.

Any plan or project not directly connected with or necessary to the management of the site but likely to have a significant effect thereon, either individually or in combination with other plans or projects, shall be subject to appropriate assessment of its implications for the site in view of the site's conservation objectives. In the light of the conclusions of the assessment of the implications for the site and subject to the provisions of paragraph 4, the competent national authorities shall agree to the plan or project only after having ascertained that it will not adversely affect the integrity of the site concerned and, if appropriate, after having obtained the opinion of the general public.

4.

If, in spite of a negative assessment of the implications for the site and in the absence of alternative solutions, a plan or project must nevertheless be carried out for imperative reasons of overriding public interest, including those of a social or economic nature, the Member State shall take all compensatory measures necessary to ensure that the overall coherence of Natura 2000 is protected. It shall inform the Commission of the compensatory measures adopted.

Where the site concerned hosts a priority natural habitat type and/or a priority species, the only considerations which may be raised are those relating to human health or public safety, to beneficial consequences of primary importance for the environment or, further to an opinion from the Commission, to other imperative reasons of overriding public interest.

Article 7

Obligations arising under Article 6 (2), (3) and (4) of this Directive shall replace any obligations arising under the first sentence of Article 4 (4) of Directive 79/409/EEC in respect of areas classified pursuant to Article 4 (1) or similarly recognized under Article 4 (2) thereof, as from the date of implementation of this Directive or the date of classification or recognition by a Member State under Directive 79/409/EEC, where the latter date is later.

Article 8

1.

In parallel with their proposals for sites eligible for designation as special areas of conservation, hosting priority natural habitat types and/or priority species, the Member States shall send, as appropriate, to the Commission their estimates relating to the Community co-financing which they consider necessary to allow them to meet their obligations pursuant to Article 6 (1).

2.

In agreement with each of the Member States concerned, the Commission shall identify, for sites of Community importance for which co-financing is sought, those measures essential for the maintenance or re-establishment at a favourable conservation status of the priority natural habitat types and priority species on the sites concerned, as well as the total costs arising from those measures.

3.

The Commission, in agreement with the Member States concerned, shall assess the financing, including co-financing, required for the operation of the measures referred to in paragraph 2, taking into account, amongst other things, the concentration on the Member State's territory of priority natural habitat types and/or priority species and the relative burdens which the required measures entail.

4.

According to the assessment referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, the Commission shall adopt, having regard to the available sources of funding under the relevant Community instruments and according to the procedure set out in Article 21, a prioritized action framework of measures involving co-financing to be taken when the site has been designated under Article 4 (4).

5.

The measures which have not been retained in the action framework for lack of sufficient resources, as well as those included in the abovementioned action framework which have not received the necessary co-financing or have only been partially co-financed, shall be reconsidered in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 21, in the context of the two-yearly review of the action framework and may, in the maintime, be postponed by the Member States pending such review. This review shall take into account, as appropriate, the new situation of the site concerned.

6.

In areas where the measures dependent on co-financing are postponed, Member States shall refrain from any new measures likely to result in deterioration of those areas.

Article 9

The Commission, acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 21, shall periodically review the contribution of Natura 2000 towards achievement of the objectives set out in Article 2 and 3. In this context, a special area of conservation may be considered for declassification where this is warranted by natural developments noted as a result of the surveillance provided for in Article 11.

Article 10

Member States shall endeavour, where they consider it necessary, in their land-use planning and development policies and, in particular, with a view to improving the ecological

coherence of the Natura  2000 network, to encourage the management of features of the landscape which are of major importance for wild fauna and flora.

Such features are those which, by virtue of their linear and continuous structure (such as rivers with their banks or the traditional systems for marking field boundaries) or their function as stepping stones (such as ponds or small woods), are essential for the migration, dispersal and genetic exchange of wild species.

Article 11

Member States shall undertake surveillance of the conservation status of the natural habitats and species referred to in Article 2 with particular regard to priority natural habitat types and priority species.

Protection of species

Article 12

1.

Member States shall take the requisite measures to establish a system of strict protection for the animal species listed in Annex IV (a) in their natural range, prohibiting:

(a)

all forms of deliberate capture or killing of specimens of these species in the wild;

(b)

deliberate disturbance of these species, particularly during the period of breeding, rearing, hibernation and migration;

(c)

deliberate destruction or taking of eggs from the wild;

(d)

deterioration or destruction of breeding sites or resting places.

2.

For these species, Member States shall prohibit the keeping, transport and sale or exchange, and offering for sale or exchange, of specimens taken from the wild, except for those taken legally before this Directive is implemented.

3.

The prohibition referred to in paragraph 1 (a) and (b) and paragraph 2 shall apply to all stages of life of the animals to which this Article applies.

4.

Member States shall establish a system to monitor the incidential capture and killing of the animal species listed in Annex IV (a). In the light of the information gathered, Member States shall take further research or conservation measures as required to ensure that incidental capture and killing does not have a significant negative impact on the species concerned.

Article 13

1.

Member States shall take the requisite measures to establish a system of strict protection for the plant species listed in Annex IV (b), prohibiting:

(a)

the deliberate picking, collecting, cutting, uprooting or destruction of such plants in their natural range in the wild;

(b)

the keeping, transport and sale or exchange and offering for sale or exchange of specimens of such species taken in the wild, except for those taken legally before this Directive is implemented.

2.

The prohibitions referred to in paragraph 1 (a) and (b) shall apply to all stages of the biological cycle of the plants to which this Article applies.

Article 14

1.

If, in the light of the surveillance provided for in Article 11, Member States deem it necessary, they shall take measures to ensure that the taking in the wild of specimens of species of wild fauna and flora listed in Annex V as well as their exploitation is compatible with their being maintained at a favourable conservation status.

2.

Where such measures are deemed necessary, they shall include continuation of the surveillance provided for in Article 11. Such measures may also include in particular:

—

regulations regarding access to certain property,

—

temporary or local prohibition of the taking of specimens in the wild and exploitation of certain populations,

—

regulation of the periods and/or methods of taking specimens,

—

application, when specimens are taken, of hunting and fishing rules which take account of the conservation of such populations,

—

establishment of a system of licences for taking specimens or of quotas,

—

regulation of the purchase, sale, offering for sale, keeping for sale or transport for sale of specimens,

—

breeding in captivity of animal species as well as artificial propagation of plant species, under strictly controlled conditions, with a view to reducing the taking of specimens of the wild,

—

assessment of the effect of the measures adopted.

Article 15

In respect of the capture or killing of species of wild fauna listed in Annex V (a) and in cases where, in accordance with Article 16, derogations are applied to the taking, capture or killing of species listed in Annex IV (a), Member States shall prohibit the use of all indiscriminate means capable of causing local disappearance of, or serious disturbance to, populations of such species, and in particular:

(a)

use of the means of capture and killing listed in Annex VI (a);

(b)

any form of capture and killing from the modes of transport referred to in Annex VI (b).

Article 16

1.

Provided that there is no satisfactory alternative and the derogation is not detrimental to the maintenance of the populations of the species concerned at a favourable conservation status in their natural range, Member States may derogate from the provisions of Articles 12, 13, 14 and 15 (a) and (b):

(a)

in the interest of protecting wild fauna and flora and conserving natural habitats;

(b)

to prevent serious damage, in particular to crops, livestock, forests, fisheries and water and other types of property;

(c)

in the interests of public health and public safety, or for other imperative reasons of overriding public interest, including those of a social or economic nature and beneficial consequences of primary importance for the environment;

(d)

for the purpose of research and education, of repopulating and re-introducing these species and for the breedings operations necessary for these purposes, including the artificial propagation of plants;

(e)

to allow, under strictly supervised conditions, on a selective basis and to a limited extent, the taking or keeping of certain specimens of the species listed in Annex IV in limited numbers specified by the competent national authorities.

2.

Member States shall forward to the Commission every two years a report in accordance with the format established by the Committee on the derogations applied under paragraph 1. The Commission shall give its opinion on these derogations within a maximum time limit of 12 months following receipt of the report and shall give an account to the Committee.

3.

The reports shall specify:

(a)

the species which are subject to the derogations and the reason for the derogation, including the nature of the risk, with, if appropriate, a reference to alternatives rejected and scientific data used;

(b)

the means, devices or methods authorized for the capture or killing of animal species and the reasons for their use;

(c)

the circumstances of when and where such derogations are granted;

(d)

the authority empowered to declare and check that the required conditions obtain and to decide what means, devices or methods may be used, within what limits and by what agencies, and which persons

are to carry out the  task;

(e)

the supervisory measures used and the results obtained.

Information

Article 17

1.

Every six years from the date of expiry of the period laid down in Article 23, Member States shall draw up a report on the implementation of the measures taken under this Directive. This report shall include in particular information concerning the conservation measures referred to in Article 6 (1) as well as evaluation of the impact of those measures on the conservation status of the natural habitat types of Annex I and the species in Annex II and the main results of the surveillance referred to in Article 11. The report, in accordance with the format established by the committee, shall be forwarded to the Commission and made accessible to the public.

2.

The Commission shall prepare a composite report based on the reports referred to in paragraph 1. This report shall include an appropriate evaluation of the progress achieved and, in particular, of the contribution of Natura 2000 to the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 3. A draft of the part of the report covering the information supplied by a Member State shall be forwarded to the Member State in question for verification. After submission to the committee, the final version of the report shall be published by the Commission, not later than two years after receipt of the reports referred to in paragraph 1, and shall be forwarded to the Member States, the European Parliament, the Council and the Economic and Social Committee.

3.

Member States may mark areas designated under this Directive by means of Community notices designed for that purpose by the committee.

Research

Article 18

1.

Member States and the Commission shall encourage the necessary research and scientific work having regard to the objectives set out in Article 2 and the obligation referred to in Article 11. They shall exchange information for the purposes of proper coordination of research carried out at Member State and at Community level.

2.

Particular attention shall be paid to scientific work necessary for the implementation of Articles 4 and 10, and transboundary cooperative research between Member States shall be encouraged.

Procedure for amending the Annexes

Article 19

Such amendments as are necessary for adapting Annexes I, II, III, V and VI to technical and scientific progress shall be adopted by the Council acting by qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission.

Such amendments as are necessary for adapting Annex IV to technical and scientific progress shall be adopted by the Council acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission.

Committee

Article 20

The Commission shall be assisted by a committee.

Article 21

1.

Where reference is made to this Article, Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999/468/EC (
1
) shall apply, having regard to the provisions of Article 8 thereof.

The period laid down in Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC shall be set at three months.

2.

The Committee shall adopt its rules of procedure.

Supplementary provisions

Article 22

In implementing the provisions of this Directive, Member States shall:

(a)

study the desirability of re-introducing species in Annex IV that are native to their territory where this might contribute to their conservation, provided that an investigation, also taking into account experience in other Member States or elsewhere, has established that such re-introduction contributes effectively to re-establishing these species at a favourable conservation status and that it takes place only after proper consultation of the public concerned;

(b)

ensure that the deliberate introduction into the wild of any species which is not native to their territory is regulated so as not to prejudice natural habitats within their natural range or the wild native fauna and flora and, if they consider it necessary, prohibit such introduction. The results of the assessment undertaken shall be forwarded to the committee for information;

(c)

promote education and general information on the need to protect species of wild fauna and flora and to conserve their habitats and natural habitats.

Final provisions

Article 23

1.

Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive within two years of its notification. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.

2.

When Member States adopt such measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such a reference shall be laid down by the Member States.

3.

Member States shall communicate to the Commission the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field covered by this Directive.

Article 24

This Directive is addressed to the Member States.

ANNEX I

NATURAL HABITAT TYPES OF COMMUNITY INTEREST WHOSE CONSERVATION REQUIRES THE DESIGNATION OF SPECIAL AREAS OF CONSERVATION

Interpretation

Guidance on the interpretation of habitat types is given in the Interpretation Manual of European Union Habitats as approved by the committee set up under Article 20 (‘Habitats Committee’) and published by the European Commission (
2
).

The code corresponds to the Natura 2000 code.

The sign ‘*’ indicates priority habitat types.

1.   COASTAL AND HALOPHYTIC HABITATS

11.
Open sea and tidal areas

1110

Sandbanks which are slightly covered by sea water all the time

1120

* Posidonia beds (Posidonion oceanicae)

1130

Estuaries

1140

Mudflats and sandflats not covered by seawater at low tide

1150

* Coastal lagoons

1160

Large shallow inlets and bays

1170

Reefs

1180

Submarine structures made by leaking gases

12.
Sea cliffs and shingle or stony beaches

1210

Annual vegetation of drift lines

1220

Perennial vegetation of stony banks

1230

Vegetated sea cliffs of the Atlantic and Baltic Coasts

1240

Vegetated sea cliffs of the Mediterranean coasts with endemic Limonium spp.

1250

Vegetated sea cliffs with endemic flora of the Macaronesian coasts

13.
Atlantic and continental salt marshes and salt meadows

1310

Salicornia and other annuals colonizing mud and sand

1320

Spartina swards (Spartinion maritimae)

1330

Atlantic salt meadows (Glauco-Puccinellietalia maritimae)

1340

* Inland salt meadows

14.
Mediterranean and thermo-Atlantic salt marshes and salt meadows

1410

Mediterranean salt meadows (Juncetalia maritimi)

1420

Mediterranean and thermo-Atlantic halophilous scrubs (Sarcocornetea fruticosi)

1430

Halo-nitrophilous scrubs (Pegano-Salsoletea)

15.
Salt and gypsum inland steppes

1510

* Mediterranean salt steppes (Limonietalia)

1520

* Iberian gypsum vegetation (Gypsophiletalia)

1530

* Pannonic salt steppes and salt marshes

16.
Boreal Baltic archipelago, coastal and landupheaval areas

1610

Baltic esker islands with sandy, rocky and shingle beach vegetation and sublittoral vegetation

1620

Boreal Baltic islets and small islands

1630

* Boreal Baltic coastal meadows

1640

Boreal Baltic sandy beaches with perennial vegetation

1650

Boreal Baltic narrow inlets

2.   COASTAL SAND DUNES AND INLAND DUNES

21.
Sea dunes of the Atlantic, North Sea and Baltic coasts

2110

Embryonic shifting dunes

2120

Shifting dunes along the shoreline with Ammophila arenaria (‘white dunes’)

2130

* Fixed coastal dunes with herbaceous vegetation (‘grey dunes’)

2140

* Decalcified fixed dunes with Empetrum nigrum

2150

* Atlantic decalcified fixed dunes (Calluno-Ulicetea)

2160

Dunes with Hippophaë rhamnoides

2170

Dunes with Salix repens ssp. argentea (Salicion arenariae)

2180

Wooded dunes of the Atlantic, Continental and Boreal region

2190

Humid dune slacks

21A0

Machairs (* in Ireland)

22.
Sea dunes of the Mediterranean coast

2210

Crucianellion maritimae fixed beach dunes

2220

Dunes with Euphorbia terracina

2230

Malcolmietalia dune grasslands

2240

Brachypodietalia dune grasslands with annuals

2250

* Coastal dunes with Juniperus spp.

2260

Cisto-Lavenduletalia dune sclerophyllous scrubs

2270

* Wooded dunes with Pinus pinea and/or Pinus pinaster

23.
Inland dunes, old and decalcified

2310

Dry sand heaths with Calluna and Genista

2320

Dry sand heaths with Calluna and Empetrum nigrum

2330

Inland dunes with open Corynephorus and Agrostis grasslands

2340

* Pannonic inland dunes

3.   FRESHWATER HABITATS

31.
Standing water

3110

Oligotrophic waters containing very few minerals of sandy plains (Littorelletalia uniflorae)

3120

Oligotrophic waters containing very few minerals generally on sandy soils of the West Mediterranean, with Isoetes spp.

3130

Oligotrophic to mesotrophic standing waters with vegetation of the Littorelletea uniflorae and/or of the Isoëto-Nanojuncetea

3140

Hard oligo-mesotrophic waters with benthic vegetation of Chara spp.

3150

Natural eutrophic lakes with Magnopotamion or Hydrocharition — type vegetation

3160

Natural dystrophic lakes and ponds

3170

* Mediterranean temporary ponds

3180

* Turloughs

3190

Lakes of gypsum karst

31A0

* Transylvanian hot-spring lotus beds

32.
Running water — sections of water courses with natural or semi-natural dynamics (minor, average and major beds) where the water quality shows no significant deterioration

3210

Fennoscandian natural rivers

3220

Alpine rivers and the herbaceous vegetation along their banks

3230

Alpine rivers and their ligneous vegetation with Myricaria germanica

3240

Alpine rivers and their ligneous vegetation with Salix elaeagnos

3250

Constantly flowing Mediterranean rivers with Glaucium flavum

3260

Water courses of plain to montane levels with the Ranunculion fluitantis and Callitricho-Batrachion vegetation

3270

Rivers with muddy banks with Chenopodion rubri p.p. and Bidention p.p. vegetation

3280

Constantly flowing Mediterranean rivers with Paspalo-Agrostidion species and hanging curtains of Salix and Populus alba

3290

Intermittently flowing Mediterranean rivers of the Paspalo-Agrostidion

32A0

Tufa cascades of karstic rivers in the Dinaric Alps

4.   TEMPERATE HEATH AND SCRUB

4010

Northern Atlantic wet heaths with Erica tetralix

4020

* Temperate Atlantic wet heaths with Erica ciliaris and Erica tetralix

4030

European dry heaths

4040

* Dry Atlantic coastal heaths with Erica vagans

4050

* Endemic macaronesian heaths

4060

Alpine and Boreal heaths

4070

* Bushes with Pinus mugo and Rhododendron hirsutum (Mugo-Rhododendretum hirsuti)

4080

Sub-Arctic Salix spp. Scrub

4090

Endemic oro-Mediterranean heaths with gorse

40A0

* Subcontinental peri-Pannonic scrub

40B0

Rhodope Potentilla fruticosa thickets

40C0

* Ponto-Sarmatic deciduous thickets

5.   SCLEROPHYLLOUS SCRUB (MATORRAL)

51.
Sub-Mediterranean and temperate scrub

5110

Stable xerothermophilous formations with Buxus sempervirens on rock slopes (Berberidion p.p.)

5120

Mountain Cytisus purgans formations

5130

Juniperus communis formations on heaths or calcareous grasslands

5140

* Cistus palhinhae formations on maritime wet heaths

52.
Mediterranean arborescent matorral

5210

Arborescent matorral with Juniperus spp.

5220

* Arborescent matorral with Zyziphus

5230

* Arborescent matorral with Laurus nobilis

53.
Thermo-Mediterranean and pre-steppe brush

5310

Laurus nobilis thickets

5320

Low formations of Euphorbia close to cliffs

5330

Thermo-Mediterranean and pre-desert scrub

54.
Phrygana

5410

West Mediterranean clifftop phryganas (Astragalo-Plantaginetum subulatae)

5420

Sarcopoterium spinosum phryganas

5430

Endemic phryganas of the Euphorbio-Verbascion

6.   NATURAL AND SEMI-NATURAL GRASSLAND FORMATIONS

61.
Natural grasslands

6110

* Rupicolous calcareous or basophilic grasslands of the Alysso-Sedion albi

6120

* Xeric sand calcareous grasslands

6130

Calaminarian grasslands of the Violetalia calaminariae

6140

Siliceous Pyrenean Festuca eskia grasslands

6150

Siliceous alpine and boreal grasslands

6160

Oro-Iberian Festuca indigesta grasslands

6170

Alpine and subalpine calcareous grasslands

6180

Macaronesian mesophile grasslands

6190

Rupicolous pannonic grasslands (Stipo-Festucetalia pallentis)

62.
Semi-natural dry grasslands and scrubland facies

6210

Semi-natural dry grasslands and scrubland facies on calcareous substrates (Festuco-Brometalia) (* important orchid sites)

6220

* Pseudo-steppe with grasses and annuals of the Thero-Brachypodietea

6230

* Species-rich Nardus grasslands, on silicious substrates in mountain areas (and submountain areas in Continental Europe)

6240

* Sub-Pannonic steppic grasslands

6250

* Pannonic loess steppic grasslands

6260

* Pannonic sand steppes

6270

* Fennoscandian lowland species-rich dry to mesic grasslands

6280

* Nordic alvar and precambrian calcareous flatrocks

62A0

Eastern sub-Mediterranean dry grasslands (Scorzoneratalia villosae)

62B0

* Serpentinophilous grassland of Cyprus

62C0

* Ponto-Sarmatic steppes

62D0

Oro-Moesian acidophilous grasslands

63.
Sclerophillous grazed forests (dehesas)

6310

Dehesas with evergreen Quercus spp.

64.
Semi-natural tall-herb humid meadows

6410

Molinia meadows on calcareous, peaty or clayey-silt-laden soils (Molinion caeruleae)

6420

Mediterranean tall humid grasslands of the Molinio-Holoschoenion

6430

Hydrophilous tall herb fringe communities of plains and of the montane to alpine levels

6440

Alluvial meadows of river valleys of the Cnidion dubii

6450

Northern boreal alluvial meadows

6460

Peat grasslands of Troodos

65.
Mesophile grasslands

6510

Lowland hay meadows (Alopecurus pratensis, Sanguisorba officinalis)

6520

Mountain hay meadows

6530

* Fennoscandian wooded meadows

6540

Sub-Mediterranean grasslands of the Molinio-Hordeion secalini

7.   RAISED BOGS AND MIRES AND FENS

71.
Sphagnum acid bogs

7110

* Active raised bogs

7120

Degraded raised bogs still capable of natural regeneration

7130

Blanket bogs (* if active bog)

7140

Transition mires and quaking bogs

7150

Depressions on peat substrates of the Rhynchosporion

7160

Fennoscandian mineral-rich springs and springfens

72.
Calcareous fens

7210

* Calcareous fens with Cladium mariscus and species of the Caricion davallianae

7220

* Petrifying springs with tufa formation (Cratoneurion)

7230

Alkaline fens

7240

* Alpine pioneer formations of the Caricion bicoloris-atrofuscae

73.
Boreal mires

7310

* Aapa mires

7320

* Palsa mires

8.   ROCKY HABITATS AND CAVES

81.
Scree

8110

Siliceous scree of the montane to snow levels (Androsacetalia alpinae and Galeopsietalia ladani)

8120

Calcareous and calcshist screes of the montane to alpine levels (Thlaspietea rotundifolii)

8130

Western Mediterranean and thermophilous scree

8140

Eastern Mediterranean screes

8150

Medio-European upland siliceous screes

8160

* Medio-European calcareous scree of hill and montane levels

82.
Rocky slopes with chasmophytic vegetation

8210

Calcareous rocky slopes with chasmophytic vegetation

8220

Siliceous rocky slopes with chasmophytic vegetation

8230

Siliceous rock with pioneer vegetation of the Sedo-Scleranthion or of the Sedo albi-Veronicion dillenii

8240

* Limestone pavements

83.
Other rocky habitats

8310

Caves not open to the public

8320

Fields of lava and natural excavations

8330

Submerged or partially submerged sea caves

8340

Permanent glaciers

9.   FORESTS

(Sub)natural woodland vegetation comprising native species forming forests of tall trees, with typical undergrowth, and meeting the following criteria: rare or residual, and/or hosting species of Community interest

90.
Forests of Boreal Europe

9010

* Western Taïga

9020

* Fennoscandian hemiboreal natural old broad-leaved deciduous forests (Quercus, Tilia, Acer, Fraxinus or Ulmus) rich in epiphytes

9030

* Natural forests of primary succession stages of landupheaval coast

9040

Nordic subalpine/subarctic forests with Betula pubescens ssp. czerepanovii

9050

Fennoscandian herb-rich forests with Picea abies

9060

Coniferous forests on, or connected to, glaciofluvial eskers

9070

Fennoscandian wooded pastures

9080

* Fennoscandian deciduous swamp woods

91.
Forests of Temperate Europe

9110

Luzulo-Fagetum beech forests

9120

Atlantic acidophilous beech forests with Ilex and sometimes also Taxus in the shrublayer (Quercion robori-petraeae or Ilici-Fagenion)

9130

Asperulo-Fagetum beech forests

9140

Medio-European subalpine beech woods with Acer and Rumex arifolius

9150

Medio-European limestone beech forests of the Cephalanthero-Fagion

9160

Sub-Atlantic and medio-European oak or oak-hornbeam forests of the Carpinion betuli

9170

Galio-Carpinetum oak-hornbeam forests

9180

* Tilio-Acerion forests of slopes, screes and ravines

9190

Old acidophilous oak woods with Quercus robur on sandy plains

91A0

Old sessile oak woods with Ilex and Blechnum in the British Isles

91B0

Thermophilous Fraxinus angustifolia woods

91C0

* Caledonian forest

91D0

* Bog woodland

91E0

* Alluvial forests with Alnus glutinosa and Fraxinus excelsior (Alno-Padion, Alnion incanae, Salicion albae)

91F0

Riparian mixed forests of Quercus robur, Ulmus laevis and Ulmus minor, Fraxinus excelsior or Fraxinus angustifolia, along the great rivers (Ulmenion minoris)

91G0

* Pannonic woods with Quercus petraea and Carpinus betulus

91H0

* Pannonian woods with Quercus pubescens

91I0

* Euro-Siberian steppic woods with Quercus spp.

91J0

* Taxus baccata woods of the British Isles

91K0

Illyrian Fagus sylvatica forests (Aremonio-Fagion)

91L0

Illyrian oak-hornbeam forests (Erythronio-Carpinion)

91M0

Pannonian-Balkanic turkey oak — sessile oak forests

91N0

* Pannonic inland sand dune thicket (Junipero-Populetum albae)

91P0

Holy Cross fir forest (Abietetum polonicum)

91Q0

Western Carpathian calcicolous Pinus sylvestris forests

91R0

Dinaric dolomite Scots pine forests (Genisto januensis-Pinetum)

91S0

* Western Pontic beech forests

91T0

Central European lichen Scots pine forests

91U0

Sarmatic steppe pine forest

91V0

Dacian Beech forests (Symphyto-Fagion)

91W0

Moesian beech forests

91X0

* Dobrogean beech forests

91Y0

Dacian oak & hornbeam forests

91Z0

Moesian silver lime woods

91AA

* Eastern white oak woods

91BA

Moesian silver fir forests

91CA

Rhodopide and Balkan Range Scots pine forests

92.
Mediterranean deciduous forests

9210

* Apeninne beech forests with Taxus and Ilex

9220

* Apennine beech forests with Abies alba and beech forests with Abies nebrodensis

9230

Galicio-Portuguese oak woods with Quercus robur and Quercus pyrenaica

9240

Quercus faginea and Quercus canariensis Iberian woods

9250

Quercus trojana woods

9260

Castanea sativa woods

9270

Hellenic beech forests with Abies borisii-regis

9280

Quercus frainetto woods

9290

Cupressus forests (Acero-Cupression)

92A0

Salix alba and Populus alba galleries

92B0

Riparian formations on intermittent Mediterranean water courses with Rhododendron ponticum, Salix and others

92C0

Platanus orientalis and Liquidambar orientalis woods (Platanion orientalis)

92D0

Southern riparian galleries and thickets (Nerio-Tamaricetea and Securinegion tinctoriae)

93.
Mediterranean sclerophyllous forests

9310

Aegean Quercus brachyphylla woods

9320

Olea and Ceratonia forests

9330

Quercus suber forests

9340

Quercus ilex and Quercus rotundifolia forests

9350

Quercus macrolepis forests

9360

* Macaronesian laurel forests (Laurus, Ocotea)

9370

* Palm groves of Phoenix

9380

Forests of Ilex aquifolium

9390

* Scrub and low forest vegetation with Quercus alnifolia

93A0

Woodlands with Quercus infectoria (Anagyro foetidae-Quercetum infectoriae)

94.
Temperate mountainous coniferous forests

9410

Acidophilous Picea forests of the montane to alpine levels (Vaccinio-Piceetea)

9420

Alpine Larix decidua and/or Pinus cembra forests

9430

Subalpine and montane Pinus uncinata forests (* if on gypsum or limestone)

95.
Mediterranean and Macaronesian mountainous coniferous forests

9510

* Southern Apennine Abies alba forests

9520

Abies pinsapo forests

9530

* (Sub-) Mediterranean pine forests with endemic black pines

9540

Mediterranean pine forests with endemic Mesogean pines

9550

Canarian endemic pine forests

9560

* Endemic forests with Juniperus spp.

9570

* Tetraclinis articulata forests

9580

* Mediterranean Taxus baccata woods

9590

* Cedrus brevifolia forests (Cedrosetum brevifoliae)

95A0

High oro-Mediterranean pine forests

ANNEX II

ANIMAL AND PLANT SPECIES OF COMMUNITY INTEREST WHOSE CONSERVATION REQUIRES THE DESIGNATION OF SPECIAL AREAS OF CONSERVATION

Interpretation

(a)

Annex II follows on from Annex I for the establishment of a consistent network of special areas of conservation.

(b)

The species listed in this Annex are indicated:

—

by the name of the species or subspecies, or

—

by all the species belonging to a higher taxon or to a designated part of that taxon.

The abbreviation ‘spp.’ after the name of a family or genus designates all the species belonging to that family or genus.

(c)

Symbols
An asterisk (*) before the name of a species indicates that it is a priority species.

Most species listed in this Annex are also listed in Annex IV. Where a species appears in this Annex but does not appear in either Annex IV or Annex V, the species name is followed by the symbol (o); where a species which appears in this Annex also appears in Annex V but does not appear in Annex IV, its name is followed by the symbol (V).

(a)

ANIMALS

VERTEBRATES

MAMMALS

INSECTIVORA

Talpidae

Galemys pyrenaicus

CHIROPTERA

Rhinolophidae

Rhinolophus blasii

Rhinolophus euryale

Rhinolophus ferrumequinum

Rhinolophus hipposideros

Rhinolophus mehelyi

Vespertilionidae

Barbastella barbastellus

Miniopterus schreibersii

Myotis bechsteinii

Myotis blythii

Myotis capaccinii

Myotis dasycneme

Myotis emarginatus

Myotis myotis

Pteropodidae

Rousettus aegyptiacus

RODENTIA

Gliridae

Myomimus roachi

Sciuridae

* Marmota marmota latirostris

* Pteromys volans (Sciuropterus russicus)

Spermophilus citellus (Citellus citellus)

* Spermophilus suslicus (Citellus suslicus)

Castoridae

Castor fiber (except the Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Finnish and Swedish populations)

Cricetidae

Mesocricetus newtoni

Microtidae

Dinaromys bogdanovi

Microtus cabrerae

* Microtus oeconomus arenicola

* Microtus oeconomus mehelyi

Microtus tatricus

Zapodidae

Sicista subtilis

CARNIVORA

Canidae

* Alopex lagopus

* Canis lupus (except the Estonian population; Greek populations: only south of the 39th parallel; Spanish populations: only those south of the Duero; Latvian, Lithuanian and Finnish populations).

Ursidae

* Ursus arctos (except the Estonian, Finnish and Swedish populations)

Mustelidae

* Gulo gulo

Lutra lutra

Mustela eversmanii

* Mustela lutreola

Vormela peregusna

Felidae

Lynx lynx (except the Estonian, Latvian and Finnish populations)

* Lynx pardinus

Phocidae

Halichoerus grypus (V)

* Monachus monachus

Phoca hispida bottnica (V)

* Phoca hispida saimensis

Phoca vitulina (V)

ARTIODACTYLA

Cervidae

* Cervus elaphus corsicanus

Rangifer tarandus fennicus (o)

Bovidae

* Bison bonasus

Capra aegagrus (natural populations)

* Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica

Ovis gmelini musimon (Ovis ammon musimon) (natural populations — Corsica and Sardinia)

Ovis orientalis ophion (Ovis gmelini ophion)

* Rupicapra pyrenaica ornata (Rupicapra rupicapra ornata)

Rupicapra rupicapra balcanica

* Rupicapra rupicapra tatrica

CETACEA

Phocoena phocoena

Tursiops truncatus

REPTILES

CHELONIA (TESTUDINES)

Testudinidae

Testudo graeca

Testudo hermanni

Testudo marginata

Cheloniidae

* Caretta caretta

* Chelonia mydas

Emydidae

Emys orbicularis

Mauremys caspica

Mauremys leprosa

SAURIA

Lacertidae

Dinarolacerta mosorensis

Lacerta bonnali (Lacerta monticola)

Lacerta monticola

Lacerta schreiberi

Gallotia galloti insulanagae

* Gallotia simonyi

Podarcis lilfordi

Podarcis pityusensis

Scincidae

Chalcides simonyi (Chalcides occidentalis)

Gekkonidae

Phyllodactylus europaeus

OPHIDIA (SERPENTES)

Colubridae

* Coluber cypriensis

Elaphe quatuorlineata

Elaphe situla

* Natrix natrix cypriaca

Viperidae

* Macrovipera schweizeri (Vipera lebetina schweizeri)

Vipera ursinii (except Vipera ursinii rakosiensis and Vipera ursinii macrops)

* Vipera ursinii macrops

* Vipera ursinii rakosiensis

AMPHIBIANS

CAUDATA

Salamandridae

Chioglossa lusitanica

Mertensiella luschani (Salamandra luschani)

* Salamandra aurorae (Salamandra atra aurorae)

Salamandrina terdigitata

Triturus carnifex (Triturus cristatus carnifex)

Triturus cristatus (Triturus cristatus cristatus)

Triturus dobrogicus (Triturus cristatus dobrogicus)

Triturus karelinii (Triturus cristatus karelinii)

Triturus montandoni

Triturus vulgaris ampelensis

Proteidae

* Proteus anguinus

Plethodontidae

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) ambrosii

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) flavus

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) genei

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) imperialis

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) strinatii

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) supramontis

ANURA

Discoglossidae

* Alytes muletensis

Bombina bombina

Bombina variegata

Discoglossus galganoi (including Discoglossus ‘jeanneae’
)

Discoglossus montalentii

Discoglossus sardus

Ranidae

Rana latastei

Pelobatidae

* Pelobates fuscus insubricus

FISH

PETROMYZONIFORMES

Petromyzonidae

Eudontomyzon spp. (o)

Lampetra fluviatilis (V) (except the Finnish and Swedish populations)

Lampetra planeri (o) (except the Estonian, Finnish, and Swedish populations)

Lethenteron zanandreai (V)

Petromyzon marinus (o) (except the Swedish populations)

ACIPENSERIFORMES

Acipenseridae

* Acipenser naccarii

* Acipenser sturio

CLUPEIFORMES

Clupeidae

Alosa spp. (V)

SALMONIFORMES

Salmonidae

Hucho hucho (natural populations) (V)

Salmo macrostigma (o)

Salmo marmoratus (o)

Salmo salar (only in fresh water) (V) (except the Finnish populations)

Salmothymus obtusirostris (o)

Coregonidae

* Coregonus oxyrhynchus (anadromous populations in certain sectors of the North Sea)

Umbridae

Umbra krameri (o)

CYPRINIFORMES

Cyprinidae

Alburnus albidus (o) (Alburnus vulturius)

Aulopyge huegelii (o)

Anaecypris hispanica

Aspius aspius (V) (except the Finnish populations)

Barbus comiza (V)

Barbus meridionalis (V)

Barbus plebejus (V)

Chalcalburnus chalcoides (o)

Chondrostoma genei (o)

Chondrostoma knerii (o)

Chondrostoma lusitanicum (o)

Chondrostoma phoxinus (o)

Chondrostoma polylepis (o) (including C. willkommi)

Chondrostoma soetta (o)

Chondrostoma toxostoma (o)

Gobio albipinnatus (o)

Gobio kessleri (o)

Gobio uranoscopus (o)

Iberocypris palaciosi (o)

* Ladigesocypris ghigii (o)

Leuciscus lucumonis (o)

Leuciscus souffia (o)

Pelecus cultratus (V)

Phoxinellus spp. (o)

* Phoxinus percnurus

Rhodeus sericeus amarus (o)

Rutilus pigus (V)

Rutilus rubilio (o)

Rutilus arcasii (o)

Rutilus macrolepidotus (o)

Rutilus lemmingii (o)

Rutilus frisii meidingeri (V)

Rutilus alburnoides (o)

Scardinius graecus (o)

Squalius microlepis (o)

Squalius svallize (o)

Cobitidae

Cobitis elongata (o)

Cobitis taenia (o) (except the Finnish populations)

Cobitis trichonica (o)

Misgurnus fossilis (o)

Sabanejewia aurata (o)

Sabanejewia larvata (o) (Cobitis larvata and Cobitis conspersa)

SILURIFORMES

Siluridae

Silurus aristotelis (V)

ATHERINIFORMES

Cyprinodontidae

Aphanius iberus (o)

Aphanius fasciatus (o)

* Valencia hispanica

* Valencia letourneuxi (Valencia hispanica)

PERCIFORMES

Percidae

Gymnocephalus baloni

Gymnocephalus schraetzer (V)

* Romanichthys valsanicola

Zingel spp. ((o) except Zingel asper and Zingel zingel (V))

Gobiidae

Knipowitschia croatica (o)

Knipowitschia (Padogobius) panizzae (o)

Padogobius nigricans (o)

Pomatoschistus canestrini (o)

SCORPAENIFORMES

Cottidae

Cottus gobio (o) (except the Finnish populations)

Cottus petiti (o)

INVERTEBRATES

ARTHROPODS

CRUSTACEA

Decapoda

Austropotamobius pallipes (V)

* Austropotamobius torrentium (V)

Isopoda

* Armadillidium ghardalamensis

INSECTA

Coleoptera

Agathidium pulchellum (o)

Bolbelasmus unicornis

Boros schneideri (o)

Buprestis splendens

Carabus hampei

Carabus hungaricus

* Carabus menetriesi pacholei

* Carabus olympiae

Carabus variolosus

Carabus zawadszkii

Cerambyx cerdo

Corticaria planula (o)

Cucujus cinnaberinus

Dorcadion fulvum cervae

Duvalius gebhardti

Duvalius hungaricus

Dytiscus latissimus

Graphoderus bilineatus

Leptodirus hochenwarti

Limoniscus violaceus (o)

Lucanus cervus (o)

Macroplea pubipennis (o)

Mesosa myops (o)

Morimus funereus (o)

* Osmoderma eremita

Oxyporus mannerheimii (o)

Pilemia tigrina

* Phryganophilus ruficollis

Probaticus subrugosus

Propomacrus cypriacus

* Pseudogaurotina excellens

Pseudoseriscius cameroni

Pytho kolwensis

Rhysodes sulcatus (o)

* Rosalia alpina

Stephanopachys linearis (o)

Stephanopachys substriatus (o)

Xyletinus tremulicola (o)

Hemiptera

Aradus angularis (o)

Lepidoptera

Agriades glandon aquilo (o)

Arytrura musculus

* Callimorpha (Euplagia, Panaxia) quadripunctaria (o)

Catopta thrips

Chondrosoma fiduciarium

Clossiana improba (o)

Coenonympha oedippus

Colias myrmidone

Cucullia mixta

Dioszeghyana schmidtii

Erannis ankeraria

Erebia calcaria

Erebia christi

Erebia medusa polaris (o)

Eriogaster catax

Euphydryas (Eurodryas, Hypodryas) aurinia (o)

Glyphipterix loricatella

Gortyna borelii lunata

Graellsia isabellae (V)

Hesperia comma catena (o)

Hypodryas maturna

Leptidea morsei

Lignyoptera fumidaria

Lycaena dispar

Lycaena helle

Maculinea nausithous

Maculinea teleius

Melanargia arge

* Nymphalis vaualbum

Papilio hospiton

Phyllometra culminaria

Plebicula golgus

Polymixis rufocincta isolata

Polyommatus eroides

Proterebia afra dalmata

Pseudophilotes bavius

Xestia borealis (o)

Xestia brunneopicta (o)

* Xylomoia strix

Mantodea

Apteromantis aptera

Odonata

Coenagrion hylas (o)

Coenagrion mercuriale (o)

Coenagrion ornatum (o)

Cordulegaster heros

Cordulegaster trinacriae

Gomphus graslinii

Leucorrhinia pectoralis

Lindenia tetraphylla

Macromia splendens

Ophiogomphus cecilia

Oxygastra curtisii

Orthoptera

Baetica ustulata

Brachytrupes megacephalus

Isophya costata

Isophya harzi

Isophya stysi

Myrmecophilus baronii

Odontopodisma rubripes

Paracaloptenus caloptenoides

Pholidoptera transsylvanica

Stenobothrus (Stenobothrodes) eurasius

ARACHNIDA

Pseudoscorpiones

Anthrenochernes stellae (o)

MOLLUSCS

GASTROPODA

Anisus vorticulus

Caseolus calculus

Caseolus commixta

Caseolus sphaerula

Chilostoma banaticum

Discula leacockiana

Discula tabellata

Discus guerinianus

Elona quimperiana

Geomalacus maculosus

Geomitra moniziana

Gibbula nivosa

* Helicopsis striata austriaca (o)

Hygromia kovacsi

Idiomela (Helix) subplicata

Lampedusa imitatrix

* Lampedusa melitensis

Leiostyla abbreviata

Leiostyla cassida

Leiostyla corneocostata

Leiostyla gibba

Leiostyla lamellosa

* Paladilhia hungarica

Sadleriana pannonica

Theodoxus transversalis

Vertigo angustior (o)

Vertigo genesii (o)

Vertigo geyeri (o)

Vertigo moulinsiana (o)

BIVALVIA

Unionoida

Margaritifera durrovensis (Margaritifera margaritifera) (V)

Margaritifera margaritifera (V)

Unio crassus

Dreissenidae

Congeria kusceri

(b)

PLANTS

PTERIDOPHYTA

ASPLENIACEAE

Asplenium jahandiezii (Litard.) Rouy

Asplenium adulterinum Milde

BLECHNACEAE

Woodwardia radicans (L.) Sm.

DICKSONIACEAE

Culcita macrocarpa C. Presl

DRYOPTERIDACEAE

Diplazium sibiricum (Turcz. ex Kunze) Kurata

* Dryopteris corleyi Fraser-Jenk.

Dryopteris fragans (L.) Schott

HYMENOPHYLLACEAE

Trichomanes speciosum Willd.

ISOETACEAE

Isoetes boryana Durieu

Isoetes malinverniana Ces. & De Not.

MARSILEACEAE

Marsilea batardae Launert

Marsilea quadrifolia L.

Marsilea strigosa Willd.

OPHIOGLOSSACEAE

Botrychium simplex Hitchc.

Ophioglossum polyphyllum A. Braun

GYMNOSPERMAE

PINACEAE

* Abies nebrodensis (Lojac.) Mattei

ANGIOSPERMAE

ALISMATACEAE

* Alisma wahlenbergii (Holmberg) Juz.

Caldesia parnassifolia (L.) Parl.

Luronium natans (L.) Raf.

AMARYLLIDACEAE

Leucojum nicaeense Ard.

Narcissus asturiensis (Jordan) Pugsley

Narcissus calcicola Mendonça

Narcissus cyclamineus DC.

Narcissus fernandesii G. Pedro

Narcissus humilis (Cav.) Traub

* Narcissus nevadensis Pugsley

Narcissus pseudonarcissus L. subsp. nobilis (Haw.) A. Fernandes

Narcissus scaberulus Henriq.

Narcissus triandrus L. subsp. capax (Salisb.) D. A. Webb.

Narcissus viridiflorus Schousboe

ASCLEPIADACEAE

Vincetoxicum pannonicum (Borhidi) Holub

BORAGINACEAE

* Anchusa crispa Viv.

Echium russicum J.F.Gemlin

* Lithodora nitida (H. Ern) R. Fernandes

Myosotis lusitanica Schuster

Myosotis rehsteineri Wartm.

Myosotis retusifolia R. Afonso

Omphalodes kuzinskyanae Willk.

* Omphalodes littoralis Lehm.

* Onosma tornensis Javorka

Solenanthus albanicus (Degen & al.) Degen & Baldacci

* Symphytum cycladense Pawl.

CAMPANULACEAE

Adenophora lilifolia (L.) Ledeb.

Asyneuma giganteum (Boiss.) Bornm.

* Campanula bohemica Hruby

* Campanula gelida Kovanda

Campanula romanica Săvul.

* Campanula sabatia De Not.

* Campanula serrata (Kit.) Hendrych

Campanula zoysii Wulfen

Jasione crispa (Pourret) Samp. subsp. serpentinica Pinto da Silva

Jasione lusitanica A. DC.

CARYOPHYLLACEAE

Arenaria ciliata L. subsp. pseudofrigida Ostenf. & O.C. Dahl

Arenaria humifusa Wahlenberg

* Arenaria nevadensis Boiss. & Reuter

Arenaria provincialis Chater & Halliday

* Cerastium alsinifolium Tausch Cerastium dinaricum G. Beck & Szysz.

Dianthus arenarius L. subsp. arenarius

* Dianthus arenarius subsp. bohemicus (Novak) O. Schwarz

Dianthus cintranus Boiss. & Reuter subsp. cintranus Boiss. & Reuter

* Dianthus diutinus Kit.

* Dianthus lumnitzeri Wiesb.

Dianthus marizii (Samp.) Samp.

* Dianthus moravicus Kovanda

* Dianthus nitidus Waldst. et Kit.

Dianthus plumarius subsp. regis-stephani (Rapcs.) Baksay

Dianthus rupicola Biv.

* Gypsophila papillosa P. Porta

Herniaria algarvica Chaudhri

* Herniaria latifolia Lapeyr. subsp. litardierei Gamis

Herniaria lusitanica (Chaudhri) subsp. berlengiana Chaudhri

Herniaria maritima Link

* Minuartia smejkalii Dvorakova

Moehringia jankae Griseb. ex Janka

Moehringia lateriflora (L.) Fenzl.

Moehringia tommasinii Marches.

Moehringia villosa (Wulfen) Fenzl

Petrocoptis grandiflora Rothm.

Petrocoptis montsicciana O. Bolos & Rivas Mart.

Petrocoptis pseudoviscosa Fernández Casas

Silene furcata Rafin. subsp. angustiflora (Rupr.) Walters

* Silene hicesiae Brullo & Signorello

Silene hifacensis Rouy ex Willk.

* Silene holzmanii Heldr. ex Boiss.

Silene longicilia (Brot.) Otth.

Silene mariana Pau

* Silene orphanidis Boiss

* Silene rothmaleri Pinto da Silva

* Silene velutina Pourret ex Loisel.

CHENOPODIACEAE

* Bassia (Kochia) saxicola (Guss.) A. J. Scott

* Cremnophyton lanfrancoi Brullo et Pavone

* Salicornia veneta Pignatti & Lausi

CISTACEAE

Cistus palhinhae Ingram

Halimium verticillatum (Brot.) Sennen

Helianthemum alypoides Losa & Rivas Goday

Helianthemum caput-felis Boiss.

* Tuberaria major (Willk.) Pinto da Silva & Rozeira

COMPOSITAE

* Anthemis glaberrima (Rech. f.) Greuter

Artemisia campestris L. subsp. bottnica A.N. Lundström ex Kindb.

* Artemisia granatensis Boiss.

* Artemisia laciniata Willd.

Artemisia oelandica (Besser) Komaror

* Artemisia pancicii (Janka) Ronn.

* Aster pyrenaeus Desf. ex DC

* Aster sorrentinii (Tod) Lojac.

Carlina onopordifolia Besser

* Carduus myriacanthus Salzm. ex DC.

* Centaurea alba L. subsp. heldreichii (Halacsy) Dostal

* Centaurea alba L. subsp. princeps (Boiss. & Heldr.) Gugler

* Centaurea akamantis T. Georgiadis & G. Chatzikyriakou

* Centaurea attica Nyman subsp. megarensis (Halacsy & Hayek) Dostal

* Centaurea balearica J.D. Rodriguez

* Centaurea borjae Valdes-Berm. & Rivas Goday

* Centaurea citricolor Font Quer

Centaurea corymbosa Pourret

Centaurea gadorensis G. Blanca

* Centaurea horrida Badaro

Centaurea immanuelis-loewii Degen

Centaurea jankae Brandza

* Centaurea kalambakensis Freyn & Sint.

Centaurea kartschiana Scop.

* Centaurea lactiflora Halacsy

Centaurea micrantha Hoffmanns. & Link subsp. herminii (Rouy) Dostál

* Centaurea niederi Heldr.

* Centaurea peucedanifolia Boiss. & Orph.

* Centaurea pinnata Pau

Centaurea pontica Prodan & E.I. Nyárády

Centaurea pulvinata (G. Blanca) G. Blanca

Centaurea rothmalerana (Arènes) Dostál

Centaurea vicentina Mariz

Cirsium brachycephalum Juratzka

* Crepis crocifolia Boiss. & Heldr.

Crepis granatensis (Willk.) B. Blanca & M. Cueto

Crepis pusilla (Sommier) Merxmüller

Crepis tectorum L. subsp. nigrescens

Erigeron frigidus Boiss. ex DC.

* Helichrysum melitense (Pignatti) Brullo et al

Hymenostemma pseudanthemis (Kunze) Willd.

Hyoseris frutescens Brullo et Pavone

* Jurinea cyanoides (L.) Reichenb.

* Jurinea fontqueri Cuatrec.

* Lamyropsis microcephala (Moris) Dittrich & Greuter

Leontodon microcephalus (Boiss. ex DC.) Boiss.

Leontodon boryi Boiss.

* Leontodon siculus (Guss.) Finch & Sell

Leuzea longifolia Hoffmanns. & Link

Ligularia sibirica (L.) Cass.

* Palaeocyanus crassifolius (Bertoloni) Dostal

Santolina impressa Hoffmanns. & Link

Santolina semidentata Hoffmanns. & Link

Saussurea alpina subsp. esthonica (Baer ex Rupr) Kupffer

* Senecio elodes Boiss. ex DC.

Senecio jacobea L. subsp. gotlandicus (Neuman) Sterner

Senecio nevadensis Boiss. & Reuter

* Serratula lycopifolia (Vill.) A. Kern

Tephroseris longifolia (Jacq.) Griseb et Schenk subsp. moravica

CONVOLVULACEAE

* Convolvulus argyrothamnus Greuter

* Convolvulus fernandesii Pinto da Silva & Teles

CRUCIFERAE

Alyssum pyrenaicum Lapeyr.

* Arabis kennedyae Meikle

Arabis sadina (Samp.) P. Cout.

Arabis scopoliana Boiss

* Biscutella neustriaca Bonnet

Biscutella vincentina (Samp.) Rothm.

Boleum asperum (Pers.) Desvaux

Brassica glabrescens Poldini

Brassica hilarionis Post

Brassica insularis Moris

* Brassica macrocarpa Guss.

Braya linearis Rouy

* Cochlearia polonica E. Fröhlich

* Cochlearia tatrae Borbas

* Coincya rupestris Rouy

* Coronopus navasii Pau

Crambe tataria Sebeok

* Degenia velebitica (Degen) Hayek

Diplotaxis ibicensis (Pau) Gómez-Campo

* Diplotaxis siettiana Maire

Diplotaxis vicentina (P. Cout.) Rothm.

Draba cacuminum Elis Ekman

Draba cinerea Adams

Draba dorneri Heuffel.

Erucastrum palustre (Pirona) Vis.

* Erysimum pieninicum (Zapal.) Pawl.

* Iberis arbuscula Runemark

Iberis procumbens Lange subsp. microcarpa Franco & Pinto da Silva

* Jonopsidium acaule (Desf.) Reichenb.

Jonopsidium savianum (Caruel) Ball ex Arcang.

Rhynchosinapis erucastrum (L.) Dandy ex Clapham subsp. cintrana (Coutinho) Franco & P. Silva (Coincya cintrana (P. Cout.) Pinto da Silva)

Sisymbrium cavanillesianum Valdés & Castroviejo

Sisymbrium supinum L.

Thlaspi jankae A. Kern.

CYPERACEAE

Carex holostoma Drejer

* Carex panormitana Guss.

Eleocharis carniolica Koch

DIOSCOREACEAE

* Borderea chouardii (Gaussen) Heslot

DROSERACEAE

Aldrovanda vesiculosa L.

ELATINACEAE

Elatine gussonei (Sommier) Brullo et al

ERICACEAE

Rhododendron luteum Sweet

EUPHORBIACEAE

* Euphorbia margalidiana Kuhbier & Lewejohann

Euphorbia transtagana Boiss.

GENTIANACEAE

* Centaurium rigualii Esteve

* Centaurium somedanum Lainz

Gentiana ligustica R. de Vilm. & Chopinet

Gentianella anglica (Pugsley) E.F. Warburg

* Gentianella bohemica Skalicky

GERANIACEAE

* Erodium astragaloides Boiss. & Reuter

Erodium paularense Fernández-González & Izco

* Erodium rupicola Boiss.

GLOBULARIACEAE

* Globularia stygia Orph. ex Boiss.

GRAMINEAE

Arctagrostis latifolia (R. Br.) Griseb.

Arctophila fulva (Trin.) N.J. Anderson

Avenula hackelii (Henriq.) Holub

Bromus grossus Desf. ex DC.

Calamagrostis chalybaea (Laest.) Fries

Cinna latifolia (Trev.) Griseb.

Coleanthus subtilis (Tratt.) Seidl

Festuca brigantina (Markgr.-Dannenb.) Markgr.-Dannenb.

Festuca duriotagana Franco & R. Afonso

Festuca elegans Boiss.

Festuca henriquesii Hack.

Festuca summilusitana Franco & R. Afonso

Gaudinia hispanica Stace & Tutin

Holcus setiglumis Boiss. & Reuter subsp. duriensis Pinto da Silva

Micropyropsis tuberosa Romero - Zarco & Cabezudo

Poa granitica Br.-Bl. subsp. disparilis (E. I. Nyárády) E. I. Nyárády

* Poa riphaea (Ascher et Graebner) Fritsch

Pseudarrhenatherum pallens (Link) J. Holub

Puccinellia phryganodes (Trin.) Scribner + Merr.

Puccinellia pungens (Pau) Paunero

* Stipa austroitalica Martinovsky

* Stipa bavarica Martinovsky & H. Scholz

Stipa danubialis Dihoru & Roman

* Stipa styriaca Martinovsky

* Stipa veneta Moraldo

* Stipa zalesskii Wilensky

Trisetum subalpestre (Hartman) Neuman

GROSSULARIACEAE

* Ribes sardoum Martelli

HIPPURIDACEAE

Hippuris tetraphylla L. Fil.

HYPERICACEAE

* Hypericum aciferum (Greuter) N.K.B. Robson

IRIDACEAE

Crocus cyprius Boiss. et Kotschy

Crocus hartmannianus Holmboe

Gladiolus palustris Gaud.

Iris aphylla L. subsp. hungarica Hegi

Iris humilis Georgi subsp. arenaria (Waldst. et Kit.) A. et D.Löve

JUNCACEAE

Juncus valvatus Link

Luzula arctica Blytt

LABIATAE

Dracocephalum austriacum L.

* Micromeria taygetea P.H. Davis

Nepeta dirphya (Boiss.) Heldr. ex Halacsy

* Nepeta sphaciotica P.H. Davis

Origanum dictamnus L.

Phlomis brevibracteata Turril

Phlomis cypria Post

Salvia veneris Hedge

Sideritis cypria Post

Sideritis incana subsp. glauca (Cav.) Malagarriga

Sideritis javalambrensis Pau

Sideritis serrata Cav. ex Lag.

Teucrium lepicephalum Pau

Teucrium turredanum Losa & Rivas Goday

* Thymus camphoratus Hoffmanns. & Link

Thymus carnosus Boiss.

* Thymus lotocephalus G. López & R. Morales (Thymus cephalotos L.)

LEGUMINOSAE

Anthyllis hystrix Cardona, Contandr. & E. Sierra

* Astragalus algarbiensis Coss. ex Bunge

* Astragalus aquilanus Anzalone

Astragalus centralpinus Braun-Blanquet

* Astragalus macrocarpus DC. subsp. lefkarensis

* Astragalus maritimus Moris

Astragalus peterfii Jáv.

Astragalus tremolsianus Pau

* Astragalus verrucosus Moris

* Cytisus aeolicus Guss. ex Lindl.

Genista dorycnifolia Font Quer

Genista holopetala (Fleischm. ex Koch) Baldacci

Melilotus segetalis (Brot.) Ser. subsp. fallax Franco

* Ononis hackelii Lange

Trifolium saxatile All.

* Vicia bifoliolata J.D. Rodríguez

LENTIBULARIACEAE

* Pinguicula crystallina Sm.

Pinguicula nevadensis (Lindb.) Casper

LILIACEAE

Allium grosii Font Quer

* Androcymbium rechingeri Greuter

* Asphodelus bento-rainhae P. Silva

* Chionodoxa lochiae Meikle in Kew Bull.

Colchicum arenarium Waldst. et Kit.

Hyacinthoides vicentina (Hoffmans. & Link) Rothm.

* Muscari gussonei (Parl.) Tod.

Scilla litardierei Breist.

* Scilla morrisii Meikle

Tulipa cypria Stapf

Tulipa hungarica Borbas

LINACEAE

* Linum dolomiticum Borbas

* Linum muelleri Moris (Linum maritimum muelleri)

LYTHRACEAE

* Lythrum flexuosum Lag.

MALVACEAE

Kosteletzkya pentacarpos (L.) Ledeb.

NAJADACEAE

Najas flexilis (Willd.) Rostk. & W.L. Schmidt

Najas tenuissima (A. Braun) Magnus

OLEACEAE

Syringa josikaea Jacq. Fil. ex Reichenb.

ORCHIDACEAE

Anacamptis urvilleana Sommier et Caruana Gatto

Calypso bulbosa L.

* Cephalanthera cucullata Boiss. & Heldr.

Cypripedium calceolus L.

Dactylorhiza kalopissii E. Nelson

Gymnigritella runei Teppner & Klein

Himantoglossum adriaticum Baumann

Himantoglossum caprinum (Bieb.) V. Koch

Liparis loeselii (L.) Rich.

* Ophrys kotschyi H.Fleischm. et Soo

* Ophrys lunulata Parl.

Ophrys melitensis (Salkowski) J et P Devillers-Terschuren

Platanthera obtusata (Pursh) subsp. oligantha (Turez.) Hulten

OROBANCHACEAE

Orobanche densiflora Salzm. ex Reut.

PAEONIACEAE

Paeonia cambessedesii (Willk.) Willk.

Paeonia clusii F.C. Stern subsp. rhodia (Stearn) Tzanoudakis

Paeonia officinalis L. subsp. banatica (Rachel) Soo

Paeonia parnassica Tzanoudakis

PALMAE

Phoenix theophrasti Greuter

PAPAVERACEAE

Corydalis gotlandica Lidén

Papaver laestadianum (Nordh.) Nordh.

Papaver radicatum Rottb. subsp. hyperboreum Nordh.

PLANTAGINACEAE

Plantago algarbiensis Sampaio (Plantago bracteosa (Willk.) G. Sampaio)

Plantago almogravensis Franco

PLUMBAGINACEAE

Armeria berlengensis Daveau

* Armeria helodes Martini & Pold

Armeria neglecta Girard

Armeria pseudarmeria (Murray) Mansfeld

* Armeria rouyana Daveau

Armeria soleirolii (Duby) Godron

Armeria velutina Welw. ex Boiss. & Reuter

Limonium dodartii (Girard) O. Kuntze subsp. lusitanicum (Daveau) Franco

* Limonium insulare (Beg. & Landi) Arrig. & Diana

Limonium lanceolatum (Hoffmans. & Link) Franco

Limonium multiflorum Erben

* Limonium pseudolaetum Arrig. & Diana

* Limonium strictissimum (Salzmann) Arrig.

POLYGONACEAE

Persicaria foliosa (H. Lindb.) Kitag.

Polygonum praelongum Coode & Cullen

Rumex rupestris Le Gall

PRIMULACEAE

Androsace mathildae Levier

Androsace pyrenaica Lam.

* Cyclamen fatrense Halda et Sojak

* Primula apennina Widmer

Primula carniolica Jacq.

Primula nutans Georgi

Primula palinuri Petagna

Primula scandinavica Bruun

Soldanella villosa Darracq.

RANUNCULACEAE

* Aconitum corsicum Gayer (Aconitum napellus subsp. corsicum)

Aconitum firmum (Reichenb.) Neilr subsp. moravicum Skalicky

Adonis distorta Ten.

Aquilegia bertolonii Schott

Aquilegia kitaibelii Schott

* Aquilegia pyrenaica D.C. subsp. cazorlensis (Heywood) Galiano

* Consolida samia P.H. Davis

* Delphinium caseyi B.L. Burtt

Pulsatilla grandis Wenderoth

Pulsatilla patens (L.) Miller

* Pulsatilla pratensis (L.) Miller subsp. hungarica Soo

* Pulsatilla slavica G. Reuss.

* Pulsatilla subslavica Futak ex Goliasova

Pulsatilla vulgaris Hill. subsp. gotlandica (Johanss.) Zaemelis & Paegle

Ranunculus kykkoensis Meikle

Ranunculus lapponicus L.

* Ranunculus weyleri Mares

RESEDACEAE

Reseda decursiva Forssk.

ROSACEAE

Agrimonia pilosa Ledebour

Potentilla delphinensis Gren. & Godron

Potentilla emilii-popii Nyárády

* Pyrus magyarica Terpo

Sorbus teodorii Liljefors

RUBIACEAE

Galium cracoviense Ehrend.

* Galium litorale Guss.

Galium moldavicum (Dobrescu) Franco

* Galium sudeticum Tausch

* Galium viridiflorum Boiss. & Reuter

SALICACEAE

Salix salvifolia Brot. subsp. australis Franco

SANTALACEAE

Thesium ebracteatum Hayne

SAXIFRAGACEAE

Saxifraga berica (Beguinot) D.A. Webb

Saxifraga florulenta Moretti

Saxifraga hirculus L.

Saxifraga osloënsis Knaben

Saxifraga tombeanensis Boiss. ex Engl.

SCROPHULARIACEAE

Antirrhinum charidemi Lange

Chaenorrhinum serpyllifolium (Lange) Lange subsp. lusitanicum R. Fernandes

* Euphrasia genargentea (Feoli) Diana

Euphrasia marchesettii Wettst. ex Marches.

Linaria algarviana Chav.

Linaria coutinhoi Valdés

Linaria loeselii Schweigger

* Linaria ficalhoana Rouy

Linaria flava (Poiret) Desf.

* Linaria hellenica Turrill

Linaria pseudolaxiflora Lojacono

* Linaria ricardoi Cout.

Linaria tonzigii Lona

* Linaria tursica B. Valdés & Cabezudo

Odontites granatensis Boiss.

* Pedicularis sudetica Willd.

Rhinanthus oesilensis (Ronniger & Saarsoo) Vassilcz

Tozzia carpathica Wol.

Verbascum litigiosum Samp.

Veronica micrantha Hoffmanns. & Link

* Veronica oetaea L.-A. Gustavsson

SOLANACEAE

* Atropa baetica Willk.

THYMELAEACEAE

* Daphne arbuscula Celak

Daphne petraea Leybold

* Daphne rodriguezii Texidor

ULMACEAE

Zelkova abelicea (Lam.) Boiss.

UMBELLIFERAE

* Angelica heterocarpa Lloyd

Angelica palustris (Besser) Hoffm.

* Apium bermejoi Llorens

Apium repens (Jacq.) Lag.

Athamanta cortiana Ferrarini

* Bupleurum capillare Boiss. & Heldr.

* Bupleurum kakiskalae Greuter

Eryngium alpinum L.

* Eryngium viviparum Gay

* Ferula sadleriana Lebed.

Hladnikia pastinacifolia Reichenb.

* Laserpitium longiradium Boiss.

* Naufraga balearica Constans & Cannon

* Oenanthe conioides Lange

Petagnia saniculifolia Guss.

Rouya polygama (Desf.) Coincy

* Seseli intricatum Boiss.

Seseli leucospermum Waldst. et Kit

Thorella verticillatinundata (Thore) Briq.

VALERIANACEAE

Centranthus trinervis (Viv.) Beguinot

VIOLACEAE

Viola delphinantha Boiss.

* Viola hispida Lam.

Viola jaubertiana Mares & Vigineix

Viola rupestris F.W. Schmidt subsp. relicta Jalas

LOWER PLANTS

BRYOPHYTA

Bruchia vogesiaca Schwaegr. (o)

Bryhnia novae-angliae (Sull & Lesq.) Grout (o)

* Bryoerythrophyllum campylocarpum (C. Müll.) Crum. (Bryoerythrophyllum machadoanum (Sergio) M.O. Hill) (o)

Buxbaumia viridis (Moug.) Moug. & Nestl. (o)

Cephalozia macounii (Aust.) Aust. (o)

Cynodontium suecicum (H. Arn. & C. Jens.) I. Hag. (o)

Dichelyma capillaceum (Dicks) Myr. (o)

Dicranum viride (Sull. & Lesq.) Lindb. (o)

Distichophyllum carinatum Dix. & Nich. (o)

Drepanocladus (Hamatocaulis) vernicosus (Mitt.) Warnst. (o)

Encalypta mutica (I. Hagen) (o)

Hamatocaulis lapponicus (Norrl.) Hedenäs (o)

Herzogiella turfacea (Lindb.) I. Wats. (o)

Hygrohypnum montanum (Lindb.) Broth. (o)

Jungermannia handelii (Schiffn.) Amak. (o)

Mannia triandra (Scop.) Grolle (o)

* Marsupella profunda Lindb. (o)

Meesia longiseta Hedw. (o)

Nothothylas orbicularis (Schwein.) Sull. (o)

Ochyraea tatrensis Vana (o)

Orthothecium lapponicum (Schimp.) C. Hartm. (o)

Orthotrichum rogeri Brid. (o)

Petalophyllum ralfsii (Wils.) Nees & Gott. (o)

Plagiomnium drummondii (Bruch & Schimp.) T. Kop. (o)

Riccia breidleri Jur. (o)

Riella helicophylla (Bory & Mont.) Mont. (o)

Scapania massolongi (K. Müll.) K. Müll. (o)

Sphagnum pylaisii Brid. (o)

Tayloria rudolphiana (Garov) B. & S. (o)

Tortella rigens (N. Alberts) (o)

SPECIES FOR MACARONESIA

PTERIDOPHYTA

HYMENOPHYLLACEAE

Hymenophyllum maderensis Gibby & Lovis

DRYOPTERIDACEAE

* Polystichum drepanum (Sw.) C. Presl.

ISOETACEAE

Isoetes azorica Durieu & Paiva ex Milde

MARSILEACEAE

* Marsilea azorica Launert & Paiva

ANGIOSPERMAE

ASCLEPIADACEAE

Caralluma burchardii N. E. Brown

* Ceropegia chrysantha Svent.

BORAGINACEAE

Echium candicans L. fil.

* Echium gentianoides Webb & Coincy

Myosotis azorica H.C. Watson

Myosotis maritima Hochst. in Seub.

CAMPANULACEAE

* Azorina vidalii (H.C. Watson) Feer

Musschia aurea (L. f.) DC.

* Musschia wollastonii Lowe

CAPRIFOLIACEAE

* Sambucus palmensis Link

CARYOPHYLLACEAE

Spergularia azorica (Kindb.) Lebel

CELASTRACEAE

Maytenus umbellata (R. Br.) Mabb.

CHENOPODIACEAE

Beta patula Ait.

CISTACEAE

Cistus chinamadensis Banares & Romero

* Helianthemum bystropogophyllum Svent.

COMPOSITAE

Andryala crithmifolia Ait.

* Argyranthemum lidii Humphries

Argyranthemum thalassophylum (Svent.) Hump.

Argyranthemum winterii (Svent.) Humphries

* Atractylis arbuscula Svent. & Michaelis

Atractylis preauxiana Schultz.

Calendula maderensis DC.

Cheirolophus duranii (Burchard) Holub

Cheirolophus ghomerytus (Svent.) Holub

Cheirolophus junonianus (Svent.) Holub

Cheirolophus massonianus (Lowe) Hansen & Sund.

Cirsium latifolium Lowe

Helichrysum gossypinum Webb

Helichrysum monogynum Burtt & Sund.

Hypochoeris oligocephala (Svent. & Bramw.) Lack

* Lactuca watsoniana Trel.

* Onopordum nogalesii Svent.

* Onorpordum carduelinum Bolle

* Pericallis hadrosoma (Svent.) B. Nord.

Phagnalon benettii Lowe

Stemmacantha cynaroides (Chr. Son. in Buch) Ditt

Sventenia bupleuroides Font Quer

* Tanacetum ptarmiciflorum Webb & Berth

CONVOLVULACEAE

* Convolvulus caput-medusae Lowe

* Convolvulus lopez-socasii Svent.

* Convolvulus massonii A. Dietr.

CRASSULACEAE

Aeonium gomeraense Praeger

Aeonium saundersii Bolle

Aichryson dumosum (Lowe) Praeg.

Monanthes wildpretii Banares & Scholz

Sedum brissemoretii Raymond-Hamet

CRUCIFERAE

* Crambe arborea Webb ex Christ

Crambe laevigata DC. ex Christ

* Crambe sventenii R. Petters ex Bramwell & Sund.

* Parolinia schizogynoides Svent.

Sinapidendron rupestre (Ait.) Lowe

CYPERACEAE

Carex malato-belizii Raymond

DIPSACACEAE

Scabiosa nitens Roemer & J.A. Schultes

ERICACEAE

Erica scoparia L. subsp. azorica (Hochst.) D.A. Webb

EUPHORBIACEAE

* Euphorbia handiensis Burchard

Euphorbia lambii Svent.

Euphorbia stygiana H.C. Watson

GERANIACEAE

* Geranium maderense P.F. Yeo

GRAMINEAE

Deschampsia maderensis (Haeck. & Born.) Buschm.

Phalaris maderensis (Menezes) Menezes

GLOBULARIACEAE

* Globularia ascanii D. Bramwell & Kunkel

* Globularia sarcophylla Svent.

LABIATAE

* Sideritis cystosiphon Svent.

* Sideritis discolor (Webb ex de Noe) Bolle

Sideritis infernalis Bolle

Sideritis marmorea Bolle

Teucrium abutiloides L’Hér.

Teucrium betonicum L’Hér.

LEGUMINOSAE

* Anagyris latifolia Brouss. ex. Willd.

Anthyllis lemanniana Lowe

* Dorycnium spectabile Webb & Berthel

* Lotus azoricus P.W. Ball

Lotus callis-viridis D. Bramwell & D. H. Davis

* Lotus kunkelii (E. Chueca) D. Bramwell & al.

* Teline rosmarinifolia Webb & Berthel.

* Teline salsoloides Arco & Acebes.

Vicia dennesiana H.C. Watson

LILIACEAE

* Androcymbium psammophilum Svent.

Scilla maderensis Menezes

Semele maderensis Costa

LORANTHACEAE

Arceuthobium azoricum Wiens & Hawksw.

MYRICACEAE

* Myrica rivas-martinezii Santos.

OLEACEAE

Jasminum azoricum L.

Picconia azorica (Tutin) Knobl.

ORCHIDACEAE

Goodyera macrophylla Lowe

PITTOSPORACEAE

* Pittosporum coriaceum Dryand. ex. Ait.

PLANTAGINACEAE

Plantago malato-belizii Lawalree

PLUMBAGINACEAE

* Limonium arborescens (Brouss.) Kuntze

Limonium dendroides Svent.

* Limonium spectabile (Svent.) Kunkel & Sunding

* Limonium sventenii Santos & Fernández Galván

POLYGONACEAE

Rumex azoricus Rech. fil.

RHAMNACEAE

Frangula azorica Tutin

ROSACEAE

* Bencomia brachystachya Svent.

Bencomia sphaerocarpa Svent.

* Chamaemeles coriacea Lindl.

Dendriopoterium pulidoi Svent.

Marcetella maderensis (Born.) Svent.

Prunus lusitanica L. subsp. azorica (Mouillef.) Franco

Sorbus maderensis (Lowe) Dode

SANTALACEAE

Kunkeliella subsucculenta Kammer

SCROPHULARIACEAE

* Euphrasia azorica H.C. Watson

Euphrasia grandiflora Hochst. in Seub.

* Isoplexis chalcantha Svent. & O’Shanahan

Isoplexis isabelliana (Webb & Berthel.) Masferrer

Odontites holliana (Lowe) Benth.

Sibthorpia peregrina L.

SOLANACEAE

* Solanum lidii Sunding

UMBELLIFERAE

Ammi trifoliatum (H.C. Watson) Trelease

Bupleurum handiense (Bolle) Kunkel

Chaerophyllum azoricum Trelease

Ferula latipinna Santos

Melanoselinum decipiens (Schrader & Wendl.) Hoffm.

Monizia edulis Lowe

Oenanthe divaricata (R. Br.) Mabb.

Sanicula azorica Guthnick ex Seub.

VIOLACEAE

Viola paradoxa Lowe

LOWER PLANTS

BRYOPHYTA

* Echinodium spinosum (Mitt.) Jur. (o)

* Thamnobryum fernandesii Sergio (o).

ANNEX III

CRITERIA FOR SELECTING SITES ELIGIBLE FOR IDENTIFICATION AS SITES OF COMMUNITY IMPORTANCE AND DESIGNATION AS SPECIAL AREAS OF CONSERVATION

STAGE 1:   Assessment at national level of the relative importance of sites for each natural habitat type in Annex I and each species in Annex II (including priority natural habitat types and priority species)

A.   Site assessment criteria for a given natural habitat type in Annex I

(a)

Degree of representativity of the natural habitat

type on the site.

(b)

Area of the site covered by the natural habitat type in relation to the total area covered by that natural habitat type within national territory.

(c)

Degree of conservation of the structure and functions of the natural habitat type concerned and restoration possibilities.

(d)

Global assessment of the value of the site for conservation of the natural habitat type concerned.

B.   Site assessment criteria for a given species in Annex II

(a)

Size and density of the population of the species present on the site in relation to the populations present within national territory.

(b)

Degree of conservation of the features of the habitat which are important for the species concerned and restoration possibilities.

(c)

Degree of isolation of the population present on the site in relation to the natural range of the species.

(d)

Global assessment of the value of the site for conservation of the species concerned.

C.

On the basis of these criteria, Member States will classify the sites which they propose on the national list as sites eligible for identification as sites of Community importance according to their relative value for the conservation of each natural habitat type in Annex I or each species in Annex II.

D.

That list will show the sites containing the priority natural habitat types and priority species selected by the Member States on the basis of the criteria in A and B above.

STAGE 2:   Assessment of the Community importance of the sites included on the national lists

1.

All the sites identified by the Member States in Stage 1 which contain priority natural habitat types and/or species will be considered as sites of Community importance.

2.

The assessment of the Community importance of other sites on Member States' lists, i.e. their contribution to maintaining or re-establishing, at a favourable conservation status, a natural habitat in Annex I or a species in Annex II and/or to the coherence of Natura 2000 will take account of the following criteria:

(a)

relative value of the site at national level;

(b)

geographical situation of the site in relation to migration routes of species in Annex II and whether it belongs to a continuous ecosystem situated on both sides of one or more internal Community frontiers;

(c)

total area of the site;

(d)

number of natural habitat types in Annex I and species in Annex II present on the site;

(e)

global ecological value of the site for the biogeographical regions concerned and/or for the whole of the territory referred to in Article 2, as regards both

the characteristic or unique  aspect of its features and the way they are combined.

ANNEX IV

ANIMAL AND PLANT SPECIES OF COMMUNITY INTEREST IN NEED OF STRICT PROTECTION

The species listed in this Annex are indicated:

—

by the name of species or subspecies, or

—

by the body of species belonging to a higher taxon or to a designated part of that taxon.

The abbreviation ‘spp.’ after the name of a family or genus designates all the species belonging to that family or genus.

(a)

ANIMALS

VERTEBRATES

MAMMALS

INSECTIVORA

Erinaceidae

Erinaceus algirus

Soricidae

Crocidura canariensis

Crocidura sicula

Talpidae

Galemys pyrenaicus

MICROCHIROPTERA

All species

MEGACHIROPTERA

Pteropodidae

Rousettus aegyptiacus

RODENTIA

Gliridae

All species except Glis glis and Eliomys quercinus

Sciuridae

Marmota marmota latirostris

Pteromys volans (Sciuropterus russicus)

Spermophilus citellus (Citellus citellus)

Spermophilus suslicus (Citellus suslicus)

Sciurus anomalus

Castoridae

Castor fiber (except the Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, Finnish and Swedish populations)

Cricetidae

Cricetus cricetus (except the Hungarian populations)

Mesocricetus newtoni

Microtidae

Dinaromys bogdanovi

Microtus cabrerae

Microtus oeconomus arenicola

Microtus oeconomus mehelyi

Microtus tatricus

Zapodidae

Sicista betulina

Sicista subtilis

Hystricidae

Hystrix cristata

CARNIVORA

Canidae

Alopex lagopus

Canis lupus (except the Greek populations north of the 39th parallel; Estonian populations, Spanish populations north of the Duero; Bulgarian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, Slovak populations and Finnish populations within the reindeer management area as defined in paragraph 2 of the Finnish Act No 848/90 of 14 September 1990 on reindeer management)

Ursidae

Ursus arctos

Mustelidae

Lutra lutra

Mustela eversmanii

Mustela lutreola

Vormela peregusna

Felidae

Felis silvestris

Lynx lynx (except the Estonian population)

Lynx pardinus

Phocidae

Monachus monachus

Phoca hispida saimensis

ARTIODACTYLA

Cervidae

Cervus elaphus corsicanus

Bovidae

Bison bonasus

Capra aegagrus (natural populations)

Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica

Ovis gmelini musimon (Ovis ammon musimon) (natural populations – Corsica and Sardinia)

Ovis orientalis ophion (Ovis gmelini ophion)

Rupicapra pyrenaica ornata (Rupicapra rupicapra ornata)

Rupicapra rupicapra balcanica

Rupicapra rupicapra tatrica

CETACEA

All species

REPTILES

TESTUDINATA

Testudinidae

Testudo graeca

Testudo hermanni

Testudo marginata

Cheloniidae

Caretta caretta

Chelonia mydas

Lepidochelys kempii

Eretmochelys imbricata

Dermochelyidae

Dermochelys coriacea

Emydidae

Emys orbicularis

Mauremys caspica

Mauremys leprosa

SAURIA

Lacertidae

Algyroides fitzingeri

Algyroides marchi

Algyroides moreoticus

Algyroides nigropunctatus

Dalmatolacerta oxycephala

Dinarolacerta mosorensis

Gallotia atlantica

Gallotia galloti

Gallotia galloti insulanagae

Gallotia simonyi

Gallotia stehlini

Lacerta agilis

Lacerta bedriagae

Lacerta bonnali (Lacerta monticola)

Lacerta monticola

Lacerta danfordi

Lacerta dugesi

Lacerta graeca

Lacerta horvathi

Lacerta schreiberi

Lacerta trilineata

Lacerta viridis

Lacerta vivipara pannonica

Ophisops elegans

Podarcis erhardii

Podarcis filfolensis

Podarcis hispanica atrata

Podarcis lilfordi

Podarcis melisellensis

Podarcis milensis

Podarcis muralis

Podarcis peloponnesiaca

Podarcis pityusensis

Podarcis sicula

Podarcis taurica

Podarcis tiliguerta

Podarcis wagleriana

Scincidae

Ablepharus kitaibelii

Chalcides bedriagai

Chalcides ocellatus

Chalcides sexlineatus

Chalcides simonyi (Chalcides occidentalis)

Chalcides viridianus

Ophiomorus punctatissimus

Gekkonidae

Cyrtopodion kotschyi

Phyllodactylus europaeus

Tarentola angustimentalis

Tarentola boettgeri

Tarentola delalandii

Tarentola gomerensis

Agamidae

Stellio stellio

Chamaeleontidae

Chamaeleo chamaeleon

Anguidae

Ophisaurus apodus

OPHIDIA

Colubridae

Coluber caspius

Coluber cypriensis

Coluber hippocrepis

Coluber jugularis

Coluber laurenti

Coluber najadum

Coluber nummifer

Coluber viridiflavus

Coronella austriaca

Eirenis modesta

Elaphe longissima

Elaphe quatuorlineata

Elaphe situla

Natrix natrix cetti

Natrix natrix corsa

Natrix natrix cypriaca

Natrix tessellata

Telescopus falax

Viperidae

Vipera ammodytes

Macrovipera schweizeri (Vipera lebetina schweizeri)

Vipera seoanni (except Spanish populations)

Vipera ursinii

Vipera xanthina

Boidae

Eryx jaculus

AMPHIBIANS

CAUDATA

Salamandridae

Chioglossa lusitanica

Euproctus asper

Euproctus montanus

Euproctus platycephalus

Mertensiella luschani (Salamandra luschani)

Salamandra atra

Salamandra aurorae

Salamandra lanzai

Salamandrina terdigitata

Triturus carnifex (Triturus cristatus carnifex)

Triturus cristatus (Triturus cristatus cristatus)

Triturus italicus

Triturus karelinii (Triturus cristatus karelinii)

Triturus marmoratus

Triturus montandoni

Triturus vulgaris ampelensis

Proteidae

Proteus anguinus

Plethodontidae

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) ambrosii

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) flavus

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) genei

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) imperialis

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) strinatii (Hydromantes (Speleomantes) italicus)

Hydromantes (Speleomantes) supramontis

ANURA

Discoglossidae

Alytes cisternasii

Alytes muletensis

Alytes obstetricans

Bombina bombina

Bombina variegata

Discoglossus galganoi (including Discoglossus ‘jeanneae’
)

Discoglossus montalentii

Discoglossus pictus

Discoglossus sardus

Ranidae

Rana arvalis

Rana dalmatina

Rana graeca

Rana iberica

Rana italica

Rana latastei

Rana lessonae

Pelobatidae

Pelobates cultripes

Pelobates fuscus

Pelobates syriacus

Bufonidae

Bufo calamita

Bufo viridis

Hylidae

Hyla arborea

Hyla meridionalis

Hyla sarda

FISH

ACIPENSERIFORMES

Acipenseridae

Acipenser naccarii

Acipenser sturio

SALMONIFORMES

Coregonidae

Coregonus oxyrhynchus (anadromous populations in certain sectors of the North Sea, except the Finnish populations)

CYPRINIFORMES

Cyprinidae

Anaecypris hispanica

Phoxinus percnurus

ATHERINIFORMES

Cyprinodontidae

Valencia hispanica

PERCIFORMES

Percidae

Gymnocephalus baloni

Romanichthys valsanicola

Zingel asper

INVERTEBRATES

ARTHROPODS

CRUSTACEA

Isopoda

Armadillidium ghardalamensis

INSECTA

Coleoptera

Bolbelasmus unicornis

Buprestis splendens

Carabus hampei

Carabus hungaricus

Carabus olympiae

Carabus variolosus

Carabus zawadszkii

Cerambyx cerdo

Cucujus cinnaberinus

Dorcadion fulvum cervae

Duvalius gebhardti

Duvalius hungaricus

Dytiscus latissimus

Graphoderus bilineatus

Leptodirus hochenwarti

Pilemia tigrina

Osmoderma eremita

Phryganophilus ruficollis

Probaticus subrugosus

Propomacrus cypriacus

Pseudogaurotina excellens

Pseudoseriscius cameroni

Pytho kolwensis

Rosalia alpina

Lepidoptera

Apatura metis

Arytrura musculus

Catopta thrips

Chondrosoma fiduciarium

Coenonympha hero

Coenonympha oedippus

Colias myrmidone

Cucullia mixta

Dioszeghyana schmidtii

Erannis ankeraria

Erebia calcaria

Erebia christi

Erebia sudetica

Eriogaster catax

Fabriciana elisa

Glyphipterix loricatella

Gortyna borelii lunata

Hypodryas maturna

Hyles hippophaes

Leptidea morsei

Lignyoptera fumidaria

Lopinga achine

Lycaena dispar

Lycaena helle

Maculinea arion

Maculinea nausithous

Maculinea teleius

Melanargia arge

Nymphalis vaualbum

Papilio alexanor

Papilio hospiton

Parnassius apollo

Parnassius mnemosyne

Phyllometra culminaria

Plebicula golgus

Polymixis rufocincta isolata

Polyommatus eroides

Proserpinus proserpina

Proterebia afra dalmata

Pseudophilotes bavius

Xylomoia strix

Zerynthia polyxena

Mantodea

Apteromantis aptera

Odonata

Aeshna viridis

Cordulegaster heros

Cordulegaster trinacriae

Gomphus graslinii

Leucorrhinia albifrons

Leucorrhinia caudalis

Leucorrhinia pectoralis

Lindenia tetraphylla

Macromia splendens

Ophiogomphus cecilia

Oxygastra curtisii

Stylurus flavipes

Sympecma braueri

Orthoptera

Baetica ustulata

Brachytrupes megacephalus

Isophya costata

Isophya harzi

Isophya stysi

Myrmecophilus baronii

Odontopodisma rubripes

Paracaloptenus caloptenoides

Pholidoptera transsylvanica

Saga pedo

Stenobothrus (Stenobothrodes) eurasius

ARACHNIDA

Araneae

Macrothele calpeiana

MOLLUSCS

GASTROPODA

Anisus vorticulus

Caseolus calculus

Caseolus commixta

Caseolus sphaerula

Chilostoma banaticum

Discula leacockiana

Discula tabellata

Discula testudinalis

Discula turricula

Discus defloratus

Discus guerinianus

Elona quimperiana

Geomalacus maculosus

Geomitra moniziana

Gibbula nivosa

Hygromia kovacsi

Idiomela (Helix) subplicata

Lampedusa imitatrix

Lampedusa melitensis

Leiostyla abbreviata

Leiostyla cassida

Leiostyla corneocostata

Leiostyla gibba

Leiostyla lamellosa

Paladilhia hungarica

Patella ferruginea

Sadleriana pannonica

Theodoxus prevostianus

Theodoxus transversalis

BIVALVIA

Anisomyaria

Lithophaga lithophaga

Pinna nobilis

Unionoida

Margaritifera auricularia

Unio crassus

Dreissenidae

Congeria kusceri

ECHINODERMATA

Echinoidea

Centrostephanus longispinus

(b)

PLANTS

Annex IV (b) contains all the plant species listed in Annex II (b) (
*1
) plus those mentioned below:

PTERIDOPHYTA

ASPLENIACEAE

Asplenium hemionitis L.

ANGIOSPERMAE

AGAVACEAE

Dracaena draco (L.) L.

AMARYLLIDACEAE

Narcissus longispathus Pugsley

Narcissus triandrus L.

BERBERIDACEAE

Berberis maderensis Lowe

CAMPANULACEAE

Campanula morettiana Reichenb.

Physoplexis comosa (L.) Schur.

CARYOPHYLLACEAE

Moehringia fontqueri Pau

COMPOSITAE

Argyranthemum pinnatifidum (L.f.) Lowe subsp. succulentum (Lowe) C. J. Humphries

Helichrysum sibthorpii Rouy

Picris willkommii (Schultz Bip.) Nyman

Santolina elegans Boiss. ex DC.

Senecio caespitosus Brot.

Senecio lagascanus DC. subsp. lusitanicus (P. Cout.) Pinto da Silva

Wagenitzia lancifolia (Sieber ex Sprengel) Dostal

CRUCIFERAE

Murbeckiella sousae Rothm.

EUPHORBIACEAE

Euphorbia nevadensis Boiss. & Reuter

GESNERIACEAE

Jankaea heldreichii (Boiss.) Boiss.

Ramonda serbica Pancic

IRIDACEAE

Crocus etruscus Parl.

Iris boissieri Henriq.

Iris marisca Ricci & Colasante

LABIATAE

Rosmarinus tomentosus Huber-Morath & Maire

Teucrium charidemi Sandwith

Thymus capitellatus Hoffmanns. & Link

Thymus villosus L. subsp. villosus L.

LILIACEAE

Androcymbium europaeum (Lange) K. Richter

Bellevalia hackelli Freyn

Colchicum corsicum Baker

Colchicum cousturieri Greuter

Fritillaria conica Rix

Fritillaria drenovskii Degen & Stoy.

Fritillaria gussichiae (Degen & Doerfler) Rix

Fritillaria obliqua Ker-Gawl.

Fritillaria rhodocanakis Orph. ex Baker

Ornithogalum reverchonii Degen & Herv.-Bass.

Scilla beirana Samp.

Scilla odorata Link

ORCHIDACEAE

Ophrys argolica Fleischm.

Orchis scopulorum Simsmerh.

Spiranthes aestivalis (Poiret) L.C.M. Richard

PRIMULACEAE

Androsace cylindrica DC.

Primula glaucescens Moretti

Primula spectabilis Tratt.

RANUNCULACEAE

Aquilegia alpina L.

SAPOTACEAE

Sideroxylon marmulano Banks ex Lowe

SAXIFRAGACEAE

Saxifraga cintrana Kuzinsky ex Willk.

Saxifraga portosanctana Boiss.

Saxifraga presolanensis Engl.

Saxifraga valdensis DC.

Saxifraga vayredana Luizet

SCROPHULARIACEAE

Antirrhinum lopesianum Rothm.

Lindernia procumbens (Krocker) Philcox

SOLANACEAE

Mandragora officinarum L.

THYMELAEACEAE

Thymelaea broterana P. Cout.

UMBELLIFERAE

Bunium brevifolium Lowe

VIOLACEAE

Viola athois W. Becker

Viola cazorlensis Gandoger

ANNEX V

ANIMAL AND PLANT SPECIES OF COMMUNITY INTEREST WHOSE TAKING IN THE WILD AND EXPLOITATION MAY BE SUBJECT TO MANAGEMENT MEASURES

The species listed in this Annex are indicated:

—

by the name of the species or subspecies, or

—

by the body of species belonging to a higher taxon or to a designated part of that taxon.

The abbreviation ‘spp.’ after the name of a family or genus designates all the species belonging to that family or genus.

(a)   ANIMALS

VERTEBRATES

MAMMALS

RODENTIA

Castoridae

Castor fiber (Finnish, Swedish, Latvian, Lithuanian, Estonian and Polish populations)

Cricetidae

Cricetus cricetus (Hungarian populations)

CARNIVORA

Canidae

Canis aureus

Canis lupus

Mustelidae

Martes martes

Mustela putorius

Felidae

Lynx lynx (Estonian population)

Phocidae

All species not mentioned in Annex IV

Viverridae

Genetta genetta

Herpestes ichneumon

DUPLICIDENTATA

Leporidae

Lepus timidus

ARTIODACTYLA

Bovidae

Capra ibex

Capra pyrenaica (except
Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica)

Rupicapra rupicapra (except
Rupicapra rupicapra balcanica,
Rupicapra rupicapra ornata and
Rupicapra rupicapra tatrica)

AMPHIBIANS

ANURA

Ranidae

Rana esculenta

Rana perezi

Rana ridibunda

Rana temporaria

FISH

PETROMYZONIFORMES

Petromyzonidae

Lampetra fluviatilis

Lethenteron zanandrai

ACIPENSERIFORMES

Acipenseridae

All species not mentioned in Annex IV

CLUPEIFORMES

Clupeidae

Alosa spp.

SALMONIFORMES

Salmonidae

Thymallus thymallus

Coregonus spp. (except
Coregonus oxyrhynchus — anadromous populations in certain sectors of the North Sea)

Hucho hucho

Salmo salar (only in fresh water)

CYPRINIFORMES

Cyprinidae

Aspius aspius

Barbus spp.

Pelecus cultratus

Rutilus friesii meidingeri

Rutilus pigus

SILURIFORMES

Siluridae

Silurus aristotelis

PERCIFORMES

Percidae

Gymnocephalus schraetzer

Zingel zingel

INVERTEBRATES

COELENTERATA

CNIDARIA

Corallium rubrum

MOLLUSCA

GASTROPODA — STYLOMMATOPHORA

Helix pomatia

BIVALVIA — UNIONOIDA

Margaritiferidae

Margaritifera margaritifera

Unionidae

Microcondylaea compressa

Unio elongatulus

ANNELIDA

HIRUDINOIDEA — ARHYNCHOBDELLAE

Hirudinidae

Hirudo medicinalis

ARTHROPODA

CRUSTACEA — DECAPODA

Astacidae

Astacus astacus

Austropotamobius pallipes

Austropotamobius torrentium

Scyllaridae

Scyllarides latus

INSECTA — LEPIDOPTERA

Saturniidae

Graellsia isabellae

(b)   PLANTS

ALGAE

RHODOPHYTA

CORALLINACEAE

Lithothamnium coralloides Crouan frat.

Phymatholithon calcareum (Poll.) Adey & McKibbin

LICHENES

CLADONIACEAE

Cladonia L. subgenus Cladina (Nyl.) Vain.

BRYOPHYTA

MUSCI

LEUCOBRYACEAE

Leucobryum glaucum (Hedw.) AAngstr.

SPHAGNACEAE

Sphagnum L. spp. (except Sphagnum pylaisii Brid.)

PTERIDOPHYTA

Lycopodium spp.

ANGIOSPERMAE

AMARYLLIDACEAE

Galanthus nivalis L.

Narcissus bulbocodium L.

Narcissus juncifolius Lagasca

COMPOSITAE

Arnica montana L.

Artemisia eriantha Tem

Artemisia genipi Weber

Doronicum plantagineum L. subsp. tournefortii (Rouy) P. Cout.

Leuzea rhaponticoides Graells

CRUCIFERAE

Alyssum pintadasilvae Dudley.

Malcolmia lacera (L.) DC. subsp. graccilima (Samp.) Franco

Murbeckiella pinnatifida (Lam.) Rothm. subsp. herminii (Rivas-Martinez) Greuter & Burdet

GENTIANACEAE

Gentiana lutea L.

IRIDACEAE

Iris lusitanica Ker-Gawler

LABIATAE

Teucrium salviastrum Schreber subsp. salviastrum Schreber

LEGUMINOSAE

Anthyllis lusitanica Cullen & Pinto da Silva

Dorycnium pentaphyllum Scop. subsp. transmontana Franco

Ulex densus Welw. ex Webb.

LILIACEAE

Lilium rubrum Lmk

Ruscus aculeatus L.

PLUMBAGINACEAE

Armeria sampaio (Bernis) Nieto Feliner

ROSACEAE

Rubus genevieri Boreau subsp. herminii (Samp.) P. Cout.

SCROPHULARIACEAE

Anarrhinum longipedicelatum R. Fernandes

Euphrasia mendonçae Samp.

Scrophularia grandiflora DC. subsp. grandiflora DC.

Scrophularia berminii Hoffmanns & Link

Scrophularia sublyrata Brot.

ANNEX VI

PROHIBITED METHODS AND MEANS OF CAPTURE AND KILLING AND MODES OF TRANSPORT

(a)   Non-selective means

MAMMALS

—

Blind or mutilated animals used as live decoys

—

Tape recorders

—

Electrical and electronic devices capable of killing or stunning

—

Artificial light sources

—

Mirrors and other dazzling devices

—

Devices for illuminating targets

—

Sighting devices for night shooting comprising an electronic image magnifier or image converter

—

Explosives

—

Nets which are non-selective according to their principle or their conditions of use

—

Traps which are non-selective according to their principle or their conditions of use

—

Crossbows

—

Poisons and poisoned or anaesthetic bait

—

Gassing or smoking out

—

Semi-automatic or automatic weapons with a magazine capable of holding more than two rounds of ammunition

FISH

—

Poison

—

Explosives

(b)   Modes of transport

—

Aircraft

—

Moving motor vehicles

(
1
) Council Decision 1999/468/EC of 28 June 1999 laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (OJ L 184, 17.7.1999, p. 23).

(
2
)  (+)

Interpretation Manual of European Union Habitats, version EUR 15/2, adopted by the Habitats Committee on 4 October 1999 and Amendments to the ‘Interpretation Manual of European Union Habitats’ with a view to EU enlargement (Hab. 01/11b-rev. 1), adopted by the Habitats Committee on 24 April 2002 after written consultation, European Commission, Directorate General for Environment;

(
*1
) Except bryophytes in Annex II (b).
