st unlock our innovative potential. This will be key not only to lead in new technologies, but also to integrate AI into our existing industries so that they can stay at the front. A central part of this agenda will be giving Europeans the skills they need to benefit from new technologies, so that technology and social inclusion go together. While Europe should aim to match the US in terms of innovation, we should aim to exceed the US in providing opportunities for education and adult learning and good jobs for all throughout their lifetimes. The second area for action is a joint plan for decarbonisation and competitiveness. If Europe's ambitious climate targets are matched by a coherent plan to achieve them, decarbonisation will be an opportunity for Europe. But if we fail to coordinate our policies, there is a risk that decarbonisation could run contrary to competitiveness and growth. Even though energy prices have fallen considerably from their peaks, EU companies still face electricity prices that are 2-3 times those in the US. Natural gas prices paid are 4-5 times higher. This price gap is primarily driven by Europe's lack of natural resources, but also by fundamental issues with our common energy market. Market rules prevent industries and households from capturing the full benefits of clean energy in their bills. High taxes and rents captured by financial traders raise energy costs for our economy. Over the medium term, decarbonisation will help shift power generation towards secure, low-cost clean energy sources. But fossil fuels will continue to play a central role in energy pricing at least for the remainder of this decade. Without a plan to transfer the benefits of decarbonisation to end-users, energy prices will continue to weigh on growth. 06 T H E F U T U R E O F E U R O P E A N C O M P E T I T I V E N E S S - PA R T A | F O R E W O R D The global decarbonisation drive is also a growth opportunity for EU industry. The EU is a world leader in clean technologies like wind turbines, electrolysers and low-carbon fuels, and more than one-fifth of clean an
