guard quality jobs in Europe. Europe's industries are facing the worst economic downturn in a decade at a period when investments are needed to achieve Europe's transition to climate neutrality. Urgent action is needed to restore the business case for investments in Europe. We want to see a European industrial deal elevated as a priority of the next EU institutional cycle. The Antwerp Declaration The undersigned companies and organisations express their full support for a European Industrial Deal to complement the Green Deal and keep high quality jobs for European workers in Europe. There is an urgent need for clarity, predictability, and confidence in Europe and its industrial policy. As very clearly stated by the Belgian PM Alexander De Croo: "We need our industry for their innovation capacity. To come up with tomorrow's climate solutions. That is why Europe should not only be a continent of industrial innovation, but should remain a continent of industrial production " (1) . To meet climate neutrality by 2050 and the recently communicated 2040 target, Europe's electricity production will need to multiply, and industry investments will need to be a factor six higher than the previous decade. This enormous challenge comes just as both large companies and SMEs face the most severe economic downturn in a decade, demand is falling, production costs increase and investments move to other regions. A US economy that benefits from the financial support from the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) and its ease of accessibility, a Chinese overcapacity and increasing exports to Europe all increase the pressure for the European industry even more. Our companies face this challenge every day. Sites are being closed, production halted, people let go. Europe needs a business case, urgently. An Open Strategic Autonomy for a competitive and resilient EU is crucial for the transition of Europe in an ever changing geopolitical landscape. It can however only be achieved if also basic and e
