rammes - across the board. The change will start with the Commission. The first-ever Commissioner for Implementation and Simplification is coordinating the Commission's work in this area and steering a screening of the EU acquis to identify ways to simplify, consolidate and codify legislation as needed. Each Commissioner will hold regular implementation dialogues with stakeholders, twice a year, to understand implementation issues, hear business concerns and identify opportunities for simplification and burden reduction. Reality checks held by Commission services with stakeholders will further feed the stress testing of EU regulation. Simplification must be informed by an understanding of the practical operation of value chains and with a regulatory system based on trust and incentives rather than detailed control in mind. The Commission will put forward its overall approach next month. This Commission will deliver an unprecedented simplification effort. This will aim to achieve the agreed policy objectives in the simplest, most targeted, most effective and least burdensome way. To ensure sustained and measurable efforts over the years ahead, the Commission has set ambitious quantified targets for reducing reporting burden: at least 25% for all companies and at least 35% for SMEs. Reporting burdens are a subset of all administrative burdens. Thus, to further increase our ambition, the 25% and 35% burden reduction targets should in the future refer to the costs of all administrative burdens, and not only reporting requirements. This results in a goal of reducing around EUR 37.5 billion ( 21 ) EIB, EIB Investment Survey 2023 18 of recurring costs until the end of the mandate ( 22 ). Dedicated measures for SMEs will aim to meet the 35% target. This will start next month with the first of a series of Simplification Omnibus packages. The first Omnibus will, among others, cover a far-reaching simplification in the fields of sustainable finance reporting, sustainability due diligence and taxonomy. In line with the objectives of the sustainable finance framework to mobili
