ent. The conclusion of a limited assurance engagement is usually provided in a negative form of expression by stating that no matter has been identified by the assurance provider to conclude that the subject EN 4 EN The CSRD requires undertakings to report value-chain information to the extent necessary for understanding their sustainability-related impacts, risks and opportunities. The CSRD establishes a so-called value-chain cap, which states that ESRS may not contain reporting requirements that would require undertakings to obtain from SMEs in their value chain information that exceeds the information to be disclosed under the proportionate standard for listed SMEs. This proposal aims to reduce the reporting burden and to limit the trickle down of obligations on smaller companies. Firstly, this current proposal aims to simplify the framework and reduce burden in the following ways: - The number of undertakings subject to mandatory sustainability reporting requirements would be reduced by about 80%, taking out of scope large undertakings with up to 1000 employees (i.e. some of the undertakings from the second wave and some of the undertakings from the first wave) and listed SMEs (i.e. all undertakings in the third wave). The reporting requirements would only apply to large undertakings with more than 1000 employees (i.e. undertakings that have more than 1000 employees and either a turnover above EUR 50 million or a balance sheet above EUR 25 million). This revised threshold would align the CSRD more closely with the CSDDD. 16 - For undertakings not subject to mandatory sustainability reporting requirements, the Commission proposes a proportionate standard for voluntary use which would be based on the VSME standard developed by EFRAG. According to this proposal, the Commission would adopt this voluntary standard as a delegated act. In the meantime, to address market demand, the Commission intends to issue a recommendation on voluntary sustainability reporting as soon as possible, based on the VSME standard developed by EFRAG. - The value-chain cap would be extend
