ased trade and access to third markets for goods and capital. Today, the world's major economies are vying for access to markets, critical raw materials, new technologies and global trade routes in the race to climate neutrality and to develop or acquire 27 Council Directive 2006/112/EC. 28 COM (2020) 98 final - A new Circular Economy Action Plan. 29 Reported in the Annual Single Market and competitiveness Report (2025 edition link). 17 strategic technologies first. Furthermore, industry faces unfair global competition notably due to the export of domestic overcapacities from other countries at highly discounted prices. We have entered an era of global geoeconomic competition with the necessity to protect the global level playing field and ensure that the EU market does not serve as a backfilling export destination for excess global capacity. 6.1. Clean Trade and Investment Partnerships According to the International Energy Agency, the global market for clean energy technology will be worth USD 2 trillion in 2035. To achieve climate neutrality in a competitive manner, it is essential that European companies, investors and workers secure the largest possible share of this opportunity. The EU's vast network of trade agreements ensures that European companies have better access to third markets and essential inputs. It is therefore crucial that the EU continues to sign, conclude and fully implement pending Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and takes forward ongoing negotiations for new FTAs. Clean Trade and Investment Partnerships (CTIPs) will complement these agreements through a faster, more flexible, and more targeted approach, tailored to the concrete business interests of the EU and its partners. The CTIPs will therefore be designed to better align the EU's external action with the EU's industrial policy objectives considering businesses' opportunities and needs. Their focus will be on better managing strategic dependencies and securing the EU's position in crucial global value chains, by diversifying our supply chains and securing better access to raw materials, cle
